---
title: "PTE funding should be redistributed"
slug: pte-funding-should-be-redistributed
date: 2003-12-03
source: https://www.scoop.co.nz/stories/ED0312/S00018/pte-funding-should-be-redistributed.htm
source-name: Scoop
author: Association of University Staff
author-slug: association-of-university-staff
---

<p><img align="left" width="85" height="85" src="http://www.aus.ac.nz/pictures/logo.gif" alt="AUS WEB SITE" border="0">Unspent private tertiary
funding should be redistributed in the public sector<br>More
than $19 million in unspent funding in the private tertiary
education sector should be reinvested in the public tertiary
education says the Association of University Staff
(AUS).<br>Associate Education (Tertiary) Minister, Steve
Maharey has announced that the $19 million in unused funding
from 2003 will be reallocated through a Strategic Priorities
Fund to new or growing PTEs in 2004. Mr Maharey said that
the money was not used this year because some PTEs under
spent their allocations and others ‘exited’ the system. He
intends to keep the money in the private sector.<br>AUS
National President, Dr Bill Rosenberg, says the government
should take the opportunity created by the failure of PTEs
such as Carich and Modern Age to to review whether private
institutions should receive public funding at all, and to
immediately reduce the overall funding handed over to
private institutions. “To say these institutions ‘exited’
the system is an insult to all those students who lost money
and to staff who lost their jobs. It shows the Minister is
not a fast learner in regard to this sector,” said Dr.
Rosenberg.   <br>“Funding to private institutions rose
rapidly in the dying days of the National government in the
late 1990’s and the present government has done nothing but
cap this funding,” said Dr. Rosenberg. “The recent crashes
have raised, once again, questions about why private
providers should profit from public funding, particularly
where facilities provided by public institutions are
duplicated in the private sector. Students, staff, public
education and the public are suffering as a result of this
badly conceived and deteriorating policy”.<br>“Public
institutions are much more accountable for the quality of
their courses but are systematically underfunded,” said Dr
Rosenberg. “The $19 million would have been better used to
double the amount of new money the government put into the
performance based research fund this year”.</p>

<p>Ends</p>

<p>For
further information please contact<br>Dr Bill Rosenberg,
National President, AUS				<br>Phone 	(03) 364 2801
(work)	<br>03) 332 8525 (home)	 <br>021 680 475 (mobile)
			<br>Email
	bill.rosenberg@canterbury.ac.nz<p>

