---
slug: canterbury-students-helping-nz-athletes-for-the-olympics
title: "Canterbury students helping NZ athletes for the Olympics"
date: 2015-01-30
source-url: https://www.scoop.co.nz/stories/ED1501/S00090/canterbury-students-helping-nz-athletes-for-the-olympics.htm
author: university-of-canterbury
---
Canterbury students helping NZ athletes for the Olympics
========================================================

**Friday, 30 January 2015, 1:34 pm**  
**Press Release: [University of Canterbury](https://info.scoop.co.nz/University_of_Canterbury)**

**University of Canterbury students helping NZ athletes for the Olympics**

**January 30, 2015**

New Zealand athletes’ Olympic participation is benefitting from a world first power meter developed by University of Canterbury graduates.

University of Canterbury engineering graduates Kim Hedley and Matthew Pottinger are helping New Zealand athletes prepare for next year’s Olympic Games next year with the aid of their power meter which has gained worldwide recognition.

The Kayak Power Meter can take a direct measure of the power generated by a kayak paddle stroke. Their invention was awarded the Ray Meyer medal for excellence in student design. The Institute of Professional Engineers New Zealand medal is awarded students who present the best final-year design project.

Hedley and Pottinger began developing the product while they were studying at the University of Canterbury. Hedley studied mechanical engineering and Pottinger studied mechatronics engineering.

“This project was the highlight of my time at University. It was the first opportunity we had to apply what we had learned from the previous years of study. This is where the development of the kayak power meter began.

Their invention received more recognition in 2011 when it was nominated the most innovative product at the world ANT+ technology symposium in Canada.

Since then, the Kayak Power Meter has established itself as one of the most powerful tools available to kayaking athletes and coaches. It is currently being used by many national federations as a training tool for their build up to the 2016 Olympics.

Advertisement - scroll to continue reading





“Our company One Giant Leap specialises in the design and manufacture of sports performance monitoring systems. We have been developing devices for almost six years in a range of sports including track and field, cycling, golf and snowboarding,” Hedley says.

“Our main focus has been on water sports. That could be put down to fact that our water sports are our personal favourites. Alongside our flagship product, the kayak power meter, we are developing a system for canoe and stand-up paddleboard.

“We have also been developing a water-sport specific tracking app that can allow the users of our power meters to get the most out of the data collected.”

“The University of Canterbury has set us up to be in a position where we could start our own business when we completed our studies. Not only were we taught the fundamental skills of engineering, but importantly, we were taught how to learn and develop new skills.

“Our technical strengths are what set our business apart from the others. Both Matt and I can say that it was our time at Canterbury, studying towards a Bachelor of Engineering, that gave us the technical strength and our advantage.

“Our power meter was used by the some members of the New Zealand team in the years leading up to the London Olympics, including Lisa Carrington, who claimed gold.”

Hedley is from Ruatoria and went to Gisborne Boys’ High School and Pottinger from Invercargill and attended James Hargest High School. Their company is based in Nelson with an office in Gisborne.

  

[© Scoop Media](http://www.scoop.co.nz/about/terms.html)  

Advertisement - scroll to continue reading



a.supporter:hover {background:#EC4438!important;} @media screen and (max-width: 480px) { #byline-block div.byline-block {padding-right:16px;}}

### Using Scoop for work?

Scoop is free for personal use, but you’ll need a licence for work use. This is part of our Ethical Paywall and how we fund Scoop. Join today with plans starting from less than $3 per week, plus gain access to exclusive _Pro_ features.  
  
[Join Pro Individual](https://pro.scoop.co.nz/Individual/?from=ProIn24) [Find out more](https://pro.scoop.co.nz/using-scoop-for-work/?from=ProIn24)

Find more from [University of Canterbury](https://info.scoop.co.nz/University_of_Canterbury) on InfoPages.