---
title: University of Auckland Council Meeting 2020-04-29
slug: uoa-council-meeting
date: 2020-04-29
source: youtube
---
# Transcript
Note: transcription and dioarization are automated and may contain errors.

_00:00_
*Speaker 1:* All of our Council members are here. Are there any disclosures of interest by any members?

_00:10_
*Speaker 1:* I'll

_00:10_
*Speaker 1:* take that as a no and we will record that. So we will move to item 3 which is the confirmative degrees and you will have noted for obvious reasons it's a slightly longer list. It's by the authority vested in me by resolution of the University of Auckland Council, I Scott St John

_00:30_
*Speaker 1:* and conferred the degree stated upon those who within their several faculties have satisfied the requirements of this university.

_00:38_
*Speaker 1:* And

_00:38_
*Speaker 1:* we will move similarly to the award of diplomas. By the authority vested in me by resolution of the University of Auckland Council, I, Scott St John Chancellor, award the diplomas stated to those who within their several faculties have satisfied the requirements of this university.

_01:00_
*Speaker 1:* So that done, we will deal with the Minutes Part A from the meeting of 16 March, which seems like an eternity ago, but we're all sitting face to face. Then, has anyone got any comments on those Minutes?

_01:24_
*Speaker 1:* So

_01:25_
*Speaker 1:* we will take them as a fair and accurate view.

_01:30_
*Speaker 1:* I will move. Can someone second please?

_01:33_
I'm

_01:34_
*Speaker 2:* happy to Scott, Cathy.

_01:35_
Thanks,

_01:36_
*Speaker 1:* Cathy. All those in favour, say aye. Aye. Aye. Against. Carried. So we will now move to the Vice-Chancellor's report. Dawn, we welcome you.

_02:00_
*Speaker 3:* Thank you Chancellor and

_02:02_
*Speaker 3:* hello

_02:03_
*Speaker 3:* to everyone

_02:03_
*Speaker 3:* who

_02:04_
*Speaker 3:* is not visible on the screen.

_02:07_
*Speaker 3:* What

_02:08_
*Speaker 3:* I'd like to do is I'll just talk through some of the highlights in the report and I may also ask Adrian to comment

_02:15_
*Speaker 3:* on

_02:16_
*Speaker 3:* one or two of the items that are contained. It's quite a lengthy report so I'm taking it as read.

_02:23_
*Speaker 3:* I

_02:23_
*Speaker 3:* want to start by acknowledging the outstanding achievement that was announced

_02:30_
*Speaker 3:* last week for the university to remain and retain

_02:33_
*Speaker 3:* its

_02:34_
*Speaker 3:* number one slot

_02:35_
*Speaker 3:* as

_02:36_
*Speaker 3:* the university leading on the sustainable development goals

_02:39_
*Speaker 3:* through

_02:40_
*Speaker 3:* the times higher education rankings. It's a significant achievement to retain that

_02:46_
*Speaker 3:* ranking,

_02:47_
*Speaker 3:* not least because of the increase in numbers of universities that submitted in a whole range of areas. So I want to start by acknowledging that and congratulating all of the staff that have been involved in

_03:00_
*Speaker 3:* that achievement to date and of course we retain it for a year

_03:03_
*Speaker 3:* so

_03:04_
*Speaker 3:* please feel free to talk about it and to continue to

_03:08_
*Speaker 3:* get

_03:09_
*Speaker 3:* behind that achievement wherever you can in whatever forum you can.

_03:12_
*Speaker 3:* The

_03:13_
*Speaker 3:* other thing I'd just like to acknowledge in this report is that you'll see that we've been able to

_03:18_
*Speaker 3:* quite

_03:18_
*Speaker 3:* extensively include the work of the PVC

_03:21_
*Speaker 3:* Pacific so

_03:23_
*Speaker 3:* Damon has now started to infuse

_03:26_
*Speaker 3:* the

_03:27_
*Speaker 3:* work of this strategy throughout

_03:30_
*Speaker 3:* number of the KPIs and we're seeing those throughout the report and I'll refer to some of those

_03:35_
*Speaker 3:* as

_03:36_
*Speaker 3:* we go through.

_03:37_
*Speaker 3:* So

_03:38_
*Speaker 3:* I'm going to just pick out, I'm not going to focus too much on

_03:42_
*Speaker 3:* the

_03:42_
*Speaker 3:* health and safety highlights. Of course we're happy to take questions on any of these items

_03:47_
*Speaker 3:* and

_03:49_
*Speaker 3:* I'll move actually through to item two. I've already mentioned some of the work

_03:55_
*Speaker 3:* that's

_03:55_
*Speaker 3:* in item two that has come through from

_03:58_
*Speaker 3:* the

_03:58_
*Speaker 3:* PBC Pacific.

_04:00_
*Speaker 3:* and the strategic plan that's being developed there. And the goals of the academic leadership framework which were endorsed

_04:07_
*Speaker 3:* by

_04:08_
*Speaker 3:* the VCDD and which will be really important in terms of supporting

_04:13_
*Speaker 3:* student

_04:14_
*Speaker 3:* -centric decisions as we go forward. So

_04:16_
*Speaker 3:* very

_04:17_
*Speaker 3:* pleased to see that now starting to take shape and be implemented.

_04:22_
*Speaker 3:* Under

_04:23_
*Speaker 3:* 2.9, just I think most of you will be aware but

_04:28_
*Speaker 3:* one

_04:29_
*Speaker 3:* of the

_04:30_
*Speaker 3:* key issues around particularly the Covid agenda and with a new vice chancellor coming in

_04:35_
*Speaker 3:* has been the importance of

_04:37_
*Speaker 3:* me

_04:38_
*Speaker 3:* getting in front of the staff and having the staff across and aware of the developments

_04:43_
*Speaker 3:* and

_04:44_
*Speaker 3:* decisions that are being made in response to

_04:46_
*Speaker 3:* Covid

_04:47_
*Speaker 3:* -19 and also in preparation for our new strategy.

_04:51_
*Speaker 3:* And so there have already been a couple of all staff forums.

_04:55_
*Speaker 3:* These

_04:55_
*Speaker 3:* would normally be face to face, but of course we're managing them

_04:58_
*Speaker 3:* online

_04:59_
*Speaker 3:* at the moment and there's going to be a further forum tomorrow

_05:02_
*Speaker 3:* with

_05:04_
*Speaker 3:* an opening to talk about what the IMT group are doing and

_05:08_
*Speaker 3:* to

_05:08_
*Speaker 3:* talk more broadly about the student engagement and research activities.

_05:12_
*Speaker 3:* They've

_05:13_
*Speaker 3:* been really well attended and we'll continue to do them throughout this period of time where we're unable to meet face to face. Importantly, there are numerous questions coming through those forums.

_05:25_
*Speaker 3:* And

_05:25_
*Speaker 3:* what we've done is collated the questions that we've been unable to answer directly in the forum and put together a web page where we've got frequently asked questions where we're attempting to address the concerns and the questions of the staff, which of course are very broad and I'll come back to that in a moment. On item three, I wasn't going to spend too much time talking about the Fs. This is one of the things that of course we'll be talking about.

_05:55_
*Speaker 3:* on the agenda later. But we've already heard today and the work that's ongoing that you're aware of from Auckland Online and the opportunities for the development of micro-credentials and the summer school activities which are referenced within this particular item.

_06:14_
*Speaker 3:* Again,

_06:14_
*Speaker 3:* happy to take questions on that and I'm sure

_06:17_
*Speaker 3:* that

_06:18_
*Speaker 3:* other members of the team would be willing to do so as well.

_06:22_
*Speaker 3:* One

_06:22_
*Speaker 3:* thing just to say is that we did run a specific forum for all postgraduate students.

_06:28_
*Speaker 3:* Jim

_06:29_
*Speaker 3:* led that with Carolyn last week and that was another really well attended forum and an important forum for the researchers and the postgrad students to think about how they can continue with business continuity in this period through the level three and potential level three alert lockdowns.

_06:51_
*Speaker 3:* If I go then to item 4 here, high quality research, again

_06:57_
*Speaker 3:* we

_06:58_
*Speaker 3:* can see that there is some input this time from our PVC Pacific. We are going to be addressing a number of things related to ethics and research on our agenda later, so I'm going to leave it at that and go directly to Sustainable Autonomous University.

_07:16_
*Speaker 3:* and

_07:16_
*Speaker 3:* acknowledging under 5.3 the major gifts and pledges

_07:20_
*Speaker 3:* that

_07:21_
*Speaker 3:* were received in January and February

_07:23_
*Speaker 3:* of

_07:24_
*Speaker 3:* this year, which are significant and outstanding. And you'll note the commentary there around

_07:30_
*Speaker 3:* the

_07:31_
*Speaker 3:* foundation. And of course,

_07:34_
*Speaker 3:* in

_07:35_
*Speaker 3:* the first six weeks of my tenure, I have been able to write to our

_07:38_
*Speaker 3:* donors

_07:39_
*Speaker 3:* and alumni and attempt to

_07:41_
*Speaker 3:* keep

_07:42_
*Speaker 3:* a level of engagement around the activities

_07:46_
*Speaker 3:* both

_07:46_
*Speaker 3:* that they've committed to but also engage them in the activities that we're

_07:51_
*Speaker 3:* planning

_07:51_
*Speaker 3:* around the student student hardship going forward.

_07:56_
*Speaker 3:* I'll

_07:56_
*Speaker 3:* continue to move through and I wanted to pick up

_07:59_
*Speaker 3:* on

_08:00_
*Speaker 3:* item seven and particularly around the treaty

_08:03_
*Speaker 3:* but

_08:04_
*Speaker 3:* to recognise

_08:05_
*Speaker 3:* actually

_08:06_
*Speaker 3:* the launch of the Toreo language plan

_08:09_
*Speaker 3:* which

_08:10_
*Speaker 3:* was launched on the 7th of April and this is a really significant achievement and I want to congratulate the team

_08:15_
*Speaker 3:* that have been involved

_08:16_
*Speaker 3:* in

_08:17_
*Speaker 3:* getting us to this point. And I believe tomorrow we're going to be able to launch the app

_08:23_
*Speaker 3:* that

_08:23_
*Speaker 3:* goes with that. So

_08:25_
*Speaker 3:* a

_08:25_
*Speaker 3:* really outstanding development there.

_08:29_
*Speaker 3:* If

_08:30_
*Speaker 3:* I can then perhaps move on

_08:32_
*Speaker 3:* to, I

_08:34_
*Speaker 3:* think I'll go directly to item nine.

_08:37_
*Speaker 3:* As

_08:38_
*Speaker 3:* you will no doubt be aware, a significant amount of time has gone into the responses to COVID-19.

_08:44_
*Speaker 3:* and that's quite a condensed report but it doesn't really take account of the extensive work that the team have been involved in and the staff have responded to and it's been phenomenal to see the way in which the staff have responded

_08:58_
*Speaker 3:* to

_08:59_
*Speaker 3:* the significant ask

_09:00_
*Speaker 3:* that

_09:01_
*Speaker 3:* has been required of them over the last few weeks.

_09:39_
*Speaker 3:* I

_09:40_
*Speaker 3:* think

_09:41_
*Speaker 3:* it's worthwhile

_09:43_
*Speaker 3:* pointing out that under 9.4

_09:45_
*Speaker 3:* accommodation,

_09:47_
*Speaker 3:* you may have

_09:48_
*Speaker 3:* read

_09:49_
*Speaker 3:* over the weekend that there was some media interest around

_09:53_
*Speaker 3:* the

_09:54_
*Speaker 3:* ways in which we've continued to

_09:56_
*Speaker 3:* charge

_09:57_
*Speaker 3:* student fees

_09:58_
*Speaker 3:* around

_09:59_
*Speaker 3:* accommodation and the comments around that from the various

_10:03_
*Speaker 3:* members

_10:04_
*Speaker 3:* of the community and from the community.

_10:05_
*Speaker 3:* from members of parliament, but also

_10:07_
*Speaker 3:* particularly

_10:08_
*Speaker 3:* because different universities have taken a different tack on this.

_10:13_
*Speaker 3:* We've

_10:13_
*Speaker 3:* been very clear about the way in which we've addressed this and

_10:16_
*Speaker 3:* have

_10:17_
*Speaker 3:* made a very

_10:18_
*Speaker 3:* detailed

_10:20_
*Speaker 3:* response to the media. They have not necessarily picked it all up with accuracy. And a lot of what was in the media at the weekend wasn't accurate, but we have been able to respond fully

_10:32_
*Speaker 3:* to

_10:33_
*Speaker 3:* the questions that have been

_10:34_
*Speaker 3:* asked

_10:35_
*Speaker 3:* of us, both

_10:35_
*Speaker 3:* from government and from

_10:37_
*Speaker 3:* parents

_10:38_
*Speaker 3:* who have been quite concerned about some of the things that they've been reading.

_10:43_
*Speaker 3:* I think then finally I might just move to

_10:49_
*Speaker 3:* something

_10:49_
*Speaker 3:* that's not in the report today

_10:51_
*Speaker 3:* but

_10:52_
*Speaker 3:* it is relevant to the work that we're doing around the

_10:55_
*Speaker 3:* planning

_10:56_
*Speaker 3:* for the workforce of the future and

_10:58_
*Speaker 3:* particularly

_10:59_
*Speaker 3:* recognising that staff at the moment are of course concerned about employment security

_11:04_
*Speaker 3:* in

_11:05_
*Speaker 3:* the immediate term. And I've made very clear statements that no long-term plans will be made at the moment around the workforce planning because we're developing new strategy and it's going to be important that the strategy

_11:19_
*Speaker 3:* leads

_11:20_
*Speaker 3:* those decisions.

_11:21_
*Speaker 3:* However,

_11:22_
*Speaker 3:* we have received from the State Service Commission

_11:25_
*Speaker 3:* some

_11:26_
*Speaker 3:* information yesterday and today related to restriction

_11:31_
*Speaker 3:* around

_11:33_
*Speaker 3:* the pay and

_11:34_
*Speaker 3:* pay freezers

_11:35_
*Speaker 3:* for

_11:35_
*Speaker 3:* staff going forward and there'll be a communication going out around that

_11:39_
*Speaker 3:* tomorrow

_11:40_
*Speaker 3:* and we have an all staff form tomorrow so we'll make sure that we're really

_11:44_
*Speaker 3:* clear

_11:45_
*Speaker 3:* about the impact of that for staff

_11:47_
*Speaker 3:* having

_11:48_
*Speaker 3:* said that

_11:48_
*Speaker 3:* it's

_11:49_
*Speaker 3:* quite clear if you look at the information that's come through the state service commission that what's already been agreed

_11:54_
*Speaker 3:* through

_11:55_
*Speaker 3:* our

_11:56_
*Speaker 3:* enterprise

_11:57_
*Speaker 3:* bargaining will remain

_11:58_
*Speaker 3:* for

_11:59_
*Speaker 3:* the period

_11:59_
*Speaker 3:* so

_12:01_
*Speaker 3:* i think i'll leave it at that i'm very happy to take questions

_12:04_
*Speaker 3:* on

_12:05_
*Speaker 3:* any matters of the report. And of course, happy Adrian, if you think there are other things that it might be worthwhile bringing to the council's attention.

_12:16_
I

_12:17_
*Speaker 1:* just wonder, Dawn, look, there is so much work to do on the strategy and there is so much that we don't know, but

_12:25_
*Speaker 1:* you

_12:26_
*Speaker 1:* are evolving your thinking in terms of the way that you're going to communicate the evolution of the strategy.

_12:35_
*Speaker 1:* and the communication and interaction with stakeholders going forward. Can you just comment on that most particularly for the benefit of folk who are listening in?

_12:49_
*Speaker 3:* Thanks, Chancellor, for the opportunity to do that. So really importantly, recognising that the pressing, the most pressing activity for us at the moment is to develop that strategy and vision.

_13:04_
*Speaker 3:* And

_13:05_
*Speaker 3:* within that will be the five-year strategic plan,

_13:08_
*Speaker 3:* a

_13:09_
*Speaker 3:* vision that takes us out way into the 2020s to 2030 and

_13:14_
*Speaker 3:* falling

_13:15_
*Speaker 3:* out of that, then the annual plans that are looked at on a three-year rolling cycle.

_13:20_
*Speaker 3:* To

_13:21_
*Speaker 3:* do that and the process we're going to go through, it's going to be really important that we

_13:25_
*Speaker 3:* engage

_13:26_
*Speaker 3:* the staff and, in fact, the student body in that work, as well as our external stakeholders

_13:32_
*Speaker 3:* in

_13:33_
*Speaker 3:* a variety of ways.

_13:34_
*Speaker 3:* in an interactive way. And so as we start to develop the green papers, these papers will be developed and indeed worked through a series of workshops and town halls

_13:48_
*Speaker 3:* and

_13:49_
*Speaker 3:* forums and our existing committee structures and our existing informal meeting structures by way of testing out

_13:56_
*Speaker 3:* our

_13:57_
*Speaker 3:* thinking, the horizon scanning,

_13:59_
*Speaker 3:* how

_14:00_
*Speaker 3:* we want to be seen in the future, the value add that we can do.

_14:04_
*Speaker 3:* can make into the future in terms of both our contribution to

_14:07_
*Speaker 3:* the

_14:08_
*Speaker 3:* nation but beyond that

_14:10_
*Speaker 3:* into

_14:11_
*Speaker 3:* Oceana and to ensure that we are engaging with staff in a way that they feel this is a strategy

_14:18_
*Speaker 3:* that

_14:19_
*Speaker 3:* we all own and share.

_14:21_
*Speaker 3:* The

_14:21_
*Speaker 3:* most important part for me of that strategy is really about getting the people and culture settings right. So whilst it's important to be clear about purpose

_14:31_
*Speaker 3:* and

_14:32_
*Speaker 3:* important to be clear about the direction of

_14:34_
*Speaker 3:* of travel, it's the people and culture strategy that really sets the tone. And so going through the development of the strategy, we'll be making sure that we are involving people and

_14:45_
*Speaker 3:* giving

_14:46_
*Speaker 3:* some serious thought to the culture

_14:48_
*Speaker 3:* that

_14:49_
*Speaker 3:* we are inhabiting within the university and how people interact with us and how we interact with others. And that's something that all staff can be involved in. So even if staff are not directly involved

_15:01_
*Speaker 3:* in

_15:02_
*Speaker 3:* the development of the research strategy,

_15:04_
*Speaker 3:* or

_15:04_
*Speaker 3:* the campus master plan, the estate strategy or the financial targeted plan,

_15:09_
*Speaker 3:* they

_15:10_
*Speaker 3:* will all have an opportunity to be a part of the values clarification

_15:13_
*Speaker 3:* and

_15:14_
*Speaker 3:* the defining characteristics of the university going forward.

_15:20_
Thank

_15:20_
*Speaker 1:* you. And just one point that might be of interest to also the folk on the call. Obviously, we're running our accommodation.

_15:31_
*Speaker 1:* We still have a big pastoral care wrap around that, but we've also got a very large population of students still in the halls. Can you just refresh my memory as to how many students there are that we've still got on campus in the halls?

_15:50_
Yep,

_15:51_
*Speaker 3:* I might just ask Adrian to give an update on that.

_15:55_
*Speaker 1:* Something over a thousand I seem to.

_15:58_
It's

_15:59_
*Speaker 4:* about

_15:59_
1500.

_16:01_
*Speaker 1:* 1,500. Yeah. Okay. Thanks, Adrian, which I think is somewhat different to what you're seeing in some of the other jurisdictions or other institutions. So with that said, questions or comments from Council for the Vice-Chancellor.

_16:32_
you

_16:32_
*Speaker 2:* say, Dawn, you prepared something that you sent to the media. I wonder if you could circulate that to Council so that we've got a clear understanding that when we're, you know, asked by people, that we have a clear understanding of what's going on with the accommodation.

_16:48_
I

_16:48_
*Speaker 3:* think that's a really good idea Cecilia so we've we had a drafted response that went also out to

_16:54_
*Speaker 3:* Chloe

_16:55_
*Speaker 3:* Swarbrick and a few others who've been interested in knowing what we're doing so we've got some very

_17:02_
*Speaker 3:* very

_17:03_
*Speaker 3:* clear messages which may be helpful for you to be able to share if people are asking you.

_17:08_
*Speaker 2:* That'd be great thank you.

_17:12_
*Speaker 5:* Tonsa, just through you. Congratulations on the sustainability award, that's fantastic.

_17:18_
*Speaker 5:* I'm

_17:19_
*Speaker 5:* not sure how big the application is, but it would be

_17:23_
*Speaker 5:* quite

_17:23_
*Speaker 5:* useful if it's not too big to pop that into the Resource Centre for Diligence so we can see what factors we're reporting on and what activities we're doing, because we don't really have a great deal of visibility of what was in that

_17:39_
*Speaker 5:* report

_17:40_
*Speaker 5:* or that application.

_17:43_
Wendy

_17:44_
*Speaker 1:* could we perhaps get you to chase that up.

_17:48_
It is

_17:50_
*Speaker 6:* extremely large. It

_17:52_
is

_17:54_
*Speaker 3:* quite extensive and Pamela I'm just wondering if you could do if there's a way of summarizing it in some way.

_18:00_
*Speaker 6:* I think we would be better to summarize it because it's a response to quite specific questions and

_18:07_
*Speaker 6:* quite

_18:07_
*Speaker 6:* a large part of the set of information

_18:12_
*Speaker 6:* We don't actually have because they're research metrics that Thompson's Reuter, that Elsevier develop

_18:19_
*Speaker 6:* and

_18:20_
*Speaker 6:* that the Times Higher people use. So we have a set of scores that we can send through but the portfolio itself is quite

_18:29_
*Speaker 5:* considerable. Okay well maybe an executive summary then.

_18:34_
*Speaker 5:* Yeah.

_18:36_
*Speaker 5:* Thank you. And just in terms of the strategy I mean that's quite a

_18:42_
*Speaker 5:* useful piece of work, although a bit distracted at the moment with COVID-19 activities. Presumably that will also cover sort of our view of workforce for the future and any paradigm shifts and international versus domestic.

_18:58_
So

_18:59_
*Speaker 3:* exactly that. So of course, part of the strategy, we're looking at the size, shape and composition of the university going forward

_19:06_
in

_19:07_
*Speaker 7:* the

_19:07_
*Speaker 3:* context of the global shift, which is a paradigm shift in

_19:11_
*Speaker 3:* high

_19:12_
*Speaker 3:* as well as

_19:13_
*Speaker 3:* what's

_19:14_
*Speaker 3:* relevant for us in terms of UOA in the nation and in our region.

_19:20_
*Speaker 3:* That

_19:20_
*Speaker 3:* includes looking at for example the ratio of undergrad

_19:24_
*Speaker 3:* to

_19:25_
*Speaker 3:* postgrad, the ratio of international to domestic, the ratio, the mix

_19:30_
*Speaker 3:* in

_19:30_
*Speaker 3:* terms of discipline mix, there's a whole set of parameters that we look at there and of course there's also the volume and quality question as well because we're a research intensive university and it's important

_19:42_
*Speaker 3:* It's important that we make sure that what we develop is distinctive for the longer term.

_19:47_
*Speaker 3:* Good.

_19:48_
*Speaker 3:* Thank you.

_19:51_
So

_19:51_
*Speaker 4:* other questions? Okay, so we will

_19:59_
*Speaker 8:* note that report. Thank you

_20:01_
for

_20:02_
*Speaker 1:* that. Can you hear me? Yes, go ahead, John.

_20:06_
*Speaker 8:* Yeah, I just wanted to ask Dawn. She mentioned that the Te Reo language

_20:13_
*Speaker 8:* Plan was being launched tomorrow. And she acknowledged Cindy and the team and I just want to tote that acknowledgement of them. But is that going to be accessible in any way for

_20:25_
*Speaker 8:* people

_20:26_
*Speaker 8:* like myself and others that are not on campus

_20:29_
*Speaker 8:* to

_20:31_
*Speaker 8:* have a look at?

_20:33_
Yeah,

_20:34_
*Speaker 3:* so I'll make sure that

_20:35_
*Speaker 3:* we

_20:36_
*Speaker 3:* circulate the information around that about that to you, John, because

_20:40_
*Speaker 3:* the

_20:41_
*Speaker 3:* language plan

_20:46_
*Speaker 3:* The app is going to be launched tomorrow. If it's not tomorrow, it will be Monday. But yes, that's something that I'm hopeful will mean that people will start to use that app as opposed to some of the other ones that are available that have been produced through the universities in New Zealand.

_21:05_
Okay,

_21:06_
*Speaker 1:* thanks. Right, so we'll note that report and we will move to Senate matters. And I think I saw John Morrow earlier. I think he's

_21:19_
*Speaker 1:* somewhere

_21:21_
*Speaker 1:* nearby. John, are you there?

_21:24_
*Speaker 9:* Yes, I am, Scott, yes.

_21:27_
I

_21:28_
*Speaker 1:* am comforted by that. Right, where are your hands?

_21:32_
Okay,

_21:32_
*Speaker 9:* thanks.

_21:33_
*Speaker 9:* Thank you very much, Chancellor. Part A recommendations from Senate requiring to be considered

_21:39_
*Speaker 9:* and

_21:40_
*Speaker 9:* received by Council. Of the academic matters, there are four new academic programs which have been developed by the Faculty of Business and Economics, and we seek approval

_21:53_
*Speaker 9:* for

_21:54_
*Speaker 9:* these programs to be advanced to QAP for its consideration. These programs are interesting.

_22:03_
*Speaker 9:* ones. The first involves changes to the Bachelor of Commerce, the major undergraduate term qualification in that faculty. And the main points about the change are to introduce a multidisciplinary core of four courses in the first year, and also to produce a capstone or to acquire a capstone course in the last year of study, which gives

_22:33_
*Speaker 9:* students and give students an opportunity to integrate what they've learned over the course of their studies. And this revised program reflects the outcome of program reviews and significant work by the faculty.

_22:52_
*Speaker 9:* In

_22:53_
*Speaker 9:* addition, there are three postgraduate qualifications, a Master of Business Analytics, a Master of

_23:03_
*Speaker 9:* A Master of Business with some discrete specialisations and also a Master of Information Governance. The last of these programmes has been developed by the Department of Commercial Law. These programmes are all available in 180 or 120 versions for candidates with appropriate entry qualifications.

_23:31_
*Speaker 9:* And these programs reflect the faculty's attempt to identify new areas which will meet the needs of the business and wider community in New Zealand. That's all I have to say on the Senate matters, Chancellor.

_23:53_
So

_23:54_
*Speaker 1:* questions for John regarding the Senate matters.

_24:05_
*Speaker 5:* Okay. Sorry, Scott. Sorry, John.

_24:11_
*Speaker 5:* Can

_24:12_
*Speaker 5:* you just confirm to me, does the capstone course, it doesn't add time to the sort of minimum time of the degree, does it?

_24:21_
No,

_24:22_
*Speaker 9:* it's part of the regular structure of the program, and it's taken typically in the last semester of the

_24:31_
*Speaker 9:* last semester of study. So that's a

_24:33_
*Speaker 5:* compulsory course.

_24:34_
*Speaker 9:* It's a compulsory course. Students have have a great deal of flexibility about what particular focus they take in in responding to that opportunity.

_24:45_
Right. Okay. Which

_24:49_
*Speaker 5:* is quite a quite a change for the commerce degree.

_24:53_
*Speaker 9:* It is yes and it follows capstones which have been introduced in other in other in other programs.

_25:01_
So

_25:01_
*Speaker 5:* this will be part of our strategic thinking then, going forward.

_25:09_
*Speaker 5:* If

_25:10_
*Speaker 5:* it's considered an appropriate way to

_25:12_
*Speaker 5:* close

_25:13_
*Speaker 5:* out a course, then

_25:14_
*Speaker 5:* perhaps

_25:15_
*Speaker 5:* it's applicable across the wide range of courses.

_25:18_
Yes,

_25:18_
*Speaker 9:* I think that's the case. And it provides students with an opportunity to reflect on the range of components that they've studied in the course of a programme.

_25:30_
*Speaker 9:* and to pull them together in some sort of coherent and interesting way.

_25:36_
*Speaker 9:* Okay,

_25:36_
*Speaker 1:* thank you.

_25:37_
*Speaker 1:* And I know there was a really good list of people who had input into that work.

_25:45_
*Speaker 1:* So anything else on Senate?

_25:50_
*Speaker 1:* That

_25:50_
*Speaker 1:* being the case, I will move that the recommendations in part of the report of Senate from April this year be adopted.

_26:00_
*Speaker 1:* and that Part B and C be noted. Can I have a seconder, please?

_26:05_
*Speaker 5:* I will.

_26:06_
*Speaker 1:* Thank you very much. Who was that? Who was it?

_26:10_
*Speaker 5:* Kath.

_26:10_
*Speaker 1:* Kath, beautiful. There you are. There's your smiling face. It's tricky. All those in favour say aye. Aye. Against. Carried. Thank you. So we'll move to correspondence.

_26:30_
*Speaker 1:* echoing what Dawn said a little earlier, I got as Chancellor last night a note from Peter Hughes, who's Head of State Services, just encouraging pay restraints. So there's nothing new in that.

_26:51_
*Speaker 1:* So

_26:52_
*Speaker 1:* is there any other correspondence that I'm not aware of

_26:56_
*Speaker 1:* that

_26:58_
*Speaker 1:* I need to be aware of? No.

_26:59_
*Speaker 1:* So we will move to item 9. Other decisions for noting. Is there anything else?

_27:07_
*Speaker 1:* I

_27:08_
*Speaker 1:* don't think so. Is there any general business?

_27:15_
*Speaker 1:* Anyone

_27:15_
*Speaker 1:* require a leave of absence?

_27:19_
*Speaker 1:* That

_27:20_
*Speaker 1:* being the case, we will move to part B and I will move that the public be excluded from part B of this meeting.

_27:28_
*Speaker 1:* However, that Adrian Clelland, Professors Metson, Morrow and Morrow, Peter Gutzel, Pamela Moss, Todd Somerville, Bridget Fitzpatrick, Wendy and Richard Elliott be permitted to remain.

_27:49_
*Speaker 1:* And

_27:50_
*Speaker 1:* with that said, we will move to part B.

_27:58_
*Speaker 1:* Do you need to give

_27:59_
*Speaker 4:* me

_28:00_
*Speaker 4:* a

_28:02_
*Speaker 4:* signal? Maybe. We're all good, Scott. Thank you. We're all

_28:15_
*Speaker 4:* good.

