---
slug: the-new-write-8-7-2002
title: "The New Write 8/7/2002"
date: 2002-07-09
source-url: https://www.scoop.co.nz/stories/PO0207/S00094/the-new-write-872002.htm
author: new-zealand-young-nationals
---
The New Write 8/7/2002
======================

**Tuesday, 9 July 2002, 9:48 am**  
**Column: [New Zealand Young Nationals](https://info.scoop.co.nz/New_Zealand_Young_Nationals)**

**THE NEW WRITE  
**

Official Newsletter of the New Zealand Young Nationals

8th July 2002

_“It is bad luck to be superstitious”  
_  
\-Andrew T. Mathis

**1\. NATIONAL’S STUDENT LOAN POLICY RELEASED  
2\. ELECTION NEWS FROM THE PREZ  
3\. HOT GOSS FROM PARLIAMENT  
4\. TOP TEN THINGS TO MAKE THE ELECTION CAMPAIGN MORE INTERESTING  
5\. WEBSITE OF THE WEEK**

**  
1\. NATIONAL’S STUDENT LOAN POLICY RELEASED**

**National will write off 10% of a graduate’s debt every year that they stay in New Zealand, for five years.**

**National Leader Bill English says this policy will save students thousands of dollars and knock years off the repayment time.**

**“It’s only fair that students pay something towards their education. But it’s gone too far – student debt has escalated under Labour, and it’s driving too many talented young people overseas for good.**

**“Most students know totally free education is unrealistic, and they don’t believe over-the-top promises. They just want a fair go, and to pay off their loan as soon as possible. That’s what we’re offering.**

**“For a loan of $15,000, this means a saving of around $6600 in principal repayments and interest costs.**

**“This policy is not just about students - it’s good for the whole country,” said Mr English.**

**Read the full policy at www.national.org.nz**

**  
**2\. ELECTION NEWS FROM THE PREZ****

****By Grant Tyrrell, NZ Young Nationals Chair****

****Green Party Anti-List:  
The Greens List has been announced and what a frightening affront to democracy it is. The first seven are current MPs (yes they do have that many) including the well known (at least to the Police) anti-globalisation protestor Sue Bradford, anti-democracy protestor\* Nandor Tanczos, anti-food campaigner Sue Kedgley and hardcore Communist (standing in Epsom, arguably the most right-leaning seat in the country) Keith Locke who is anti-defence and foreign relations (except with Communist countries).****

****

Advertisement - scroll to continue reading











****

****As for the new talent, the first new-comer is Metiria Turei has a substantial political career behind her (at least by Green standards) having formerly stood for McGillicuddy Serious and Aotearoa Legalise Cannabis Party. She is also a self-described 'anarcho-feminist' and anti the patriarchy hierarchy (what ever that means). The list is rounded out by an anti-mining campaigner and an anti-motorway campaigner. In fact it appears that the only thing that the Greens are not anti is legalising dope.

\*See the Green Party website; "Voting every three years is not democracy. That is just electing your own dictator."

ACT dumps MPs - List released  
Speaking of lists, our friends to the right have finally released their List. After some spurious cracks at the National List, which has promoted some new talent including Don Brash, but which all continuing MPs are expected to regain their place in Parliament, ACT have dumped some of their hard working MPs. Deputy Leader Ken Shirley, Owen Jennings and the effervescent Penny Webster are all unlikely to return to Parliament.

Independence Left the fourth estate?  
Politicians and the fourth estate have always had an uneasy (although important) relationship, but a key of New Zealand media has been its independence.

However this fundamental has become unstable in recent years. It is no secret that Helen Clark is better at manipulating the media (or communicating depending on your point of view) but recently the State News Provider has caused more than the odd eyebrow to raise. Take for example the 'independent' election commentators, ex Alliance MP Pam Corkery, former NZ First MP Michael Laws and former Labour Prime Minister David Lange. An excellent balance of backgrounds and views - at a Labour congress.

Great delight was taken in showing empty seats at the highly successful National Party launch, although there was no mention of that fact that the media had requested the back row to be empty for their cameras. At the end of the day the North Shore Event Centre had 900 capacity and 20 odd empty seats. The Aotea centre has room for 800 people and definitely had empty seats after organisers ejected GE protestors.

It is hardly any wonder that TV3 are advertising their election coverage as "Independent".

  
Police reject Labour demands - again  
Labour organisers demanded that Police arrest GE Protestors ejected from St Helen's orchestrated campaign launch and charge them with trespass. Presumably they believed that if it is good enough for St Helen to bully the Police (think Constable A and art fraud) then it was good enough for them.

Police declined.

Turia calls for special treatment for Maori prisoners  
Tariana Turia of 'holocaust' infamy is at it again. Colonisation is to blame for all ills that befall Maori including a disproportionate number of Maori offenders. Colonisation is also apparently to blame for mental illness and other social problems. Because Colonisation is to blame "prevention and rehabilitation must take this into account" - this reads as code for special treatment.

National believes that we should value and learn from our history not be held prisoner by it, that is why National is committed to solving historical grievances. National believes in going forward together, not playing the blame game.

School's Out for Clark  
Helen Clark just cannot work it out, being Prime Minister is more than photo opportunities and massaging the fourth estate. Her latest effort - opening a school on the first day of the school holidays!

  
**3\. HOT GOSS FROM PARLIAMENT  
**

\*Hot Goss from Parliament is now becoming almost too successful. This week I’ve had to cut several bits; some stuff I am receiving is too good to give away here, and is being saved for the right occasion. Other stuff has had to be pulled because of legal threats.

  
\*An anonymous punter says he found himself in the same restaurant as Laila Harre, Matt McCarten and other Alliance big-wigs a few weeks ago. He couldn’t help overhearing the following tidbits:

\-McCarten apparently proposed that 'scab' should be spray painted all over Jim Anderton's billboards, and that there was money missing from Alliance accounts.

\-Harre chatted on anarchist feminism and patriarchy being the problem, and the role of deconstruction in this issue.

  
\*The ‘No Crap’ website has received it’s first complaint to the electoral commission – a complainant believes that an article on Peacenik Hippies (previously featured in the New Write) encourages violence.

What was the reply from the No Crap team? “No, it doesn’t encourage violence, and if you complain about our website again we will find out where you live and smack you up,” they wrote in their first newsletter.

  
\*Labour MP David Cunliffe must have some sort of fan club – noticeable at the Labour Party launch were large banners with his name sprawled across. Some journalists were sceptical though. Colin Espiner of the Press wrote that “Cunliffe must have had to pay some of the audience for turning up waving huge placards bearing his name. Obviously Party President Mike William’s wooing of big business has paid off."

  
\*Busted – the Waikato Times has published a very embarrassing photo of Trevor Mallard last week. Parliament’s hard-man was pictured carrying Helen Clark’s handbag over his shoulder at a Greypower meeting. Surprisingly, it suited the big guy.

So what is Trev’s new job title? Is it “Helen’s Little Helper”? Or “Minister Assisting the Prime Minister with her Handbag”?

  
\*Perhaps related to the first item…someone has sprayed the large words “waka-jumper” over Jim Anderton’s billboard on SH1 at Ngaruawahia. We’re not implying anything, but doesn’t Alliance council member and Anderton enemy Dave MacPherson live in Ngaruawahia?

  
**4\. TOP TEN THINGS TO MAKE THE ELECTION CAMPAIGN MORE INTERESTING**

1\. Mike Williams will trip over the bags under his eyes and fall off the stage in front of TV cameras.

2\. Michael Cullen will confess that a former Governor of the Reserve  
Bank may know more about economics than a former history lecturer.

3\. Winston Peters to kick off his campaign in white singlet, blue  
stubbies, and jandals - and do it at 10am in broad daylight.

4\. David Benson Pope will barge Helen Clark off the podium at the  
campaign launch and tell her to watch a real professional in action.

5\. Someone will slap Jim Anderton next time he mentions his portfolios in an interview and says "I've been in politics for 36 years".

6\. Nandor Tanczos will admit that he's just recovered from a bad trip where he spent three years in a big house, surrounded by "far-out dudes, man, and bad vibes".  
7\. Jim Anderton to finally admit the reason he got no broadcasting funding is cos he's a &$#%ing party hopper.

8\. Mark Burton will be caught on camera laughing at pictures of Helen Clark on www.nocrap.org.nz

9\. The Greens will find a candidate who'd look more at home in Parliament than in a zoo.

10\. Rodney Hide and his supporters get to say to the media what they really think of ACT's decision not to let him stand in Epsom.

Be brave and pass it on!  
St Molesworth:  
www.geocities.com/stmolesworth

  
**5\. WEBSITE OF THE WEEK  
**

www.annetolley.co.nz

This is the website of National MP Anne Tolley. It is a very flash website in it’s own right, but the best part of this site is the “Salsa Wars” game where you can throw rotten GE tomatoes at politicians in Parliament. It is very funny, and pokes fun at all MPs. The demo is available on the site, but you have to shell out money for the full version, which features more MPs and effects.

Congratulations to Napier Young Nats who designed and promoted the site.

_Any views expressed here are not necessarily those of New Zealand Young  
Nationals, or the New Zealand National Party._

_Contributions, feedback, articles and subscriptions welcome. Email  
newwrite@national.org.nz_

_Editor: Phil Rennie  
_

_[© Scoop Media](http://www.scoop.co.nz/about/terms.html)  
_

_

Advertisement - scroll to continue reading



_

_a.supporter:hover {background:#EC4438!important;} @media screen and (max-width: 480px) { #byline-block div.byline-block {padding-right:16px;}}

### Using Scoop for work?

Scoop is free for personal use, but you’ll need a licence for work use. This is part of our Ethical Paywall and how we fund Scoop. Join today with plans starting from less than $3 per week, plus gain access to exclusive _Pro_ features.  
  
[Join Pro Individual](https://pro.scoop.co.nz/Individual/?from=ProIn24) [Find out more](https://pro.scoop.co.nz/using-scoop-for-work/?from=ProIn24)

Find more from [New Zealand Young Nationals](https://info.scoop.co.nz/New_Zealand_Young_Nationals) on InfoPages._****