---
title: History of Universities in Aotearoa NZ
slug: university-history
---

<script src="/table-of-contents.js" columns="2"></script>




# Late 19th century (1800s)
## Stolen whenua
> As with other settler states—namely the US, Canada, and Australia—higher education in New Zealand is “part of a nexus of power and governmentality shaped by a history of colonial invasion” (Kidman, 2020, p. 249). All bar two (AUT and Waikato) of New Zealand’s universities were built in the late 19th century and initially funded by income from government land reserves in order to deliver a curriculum servicing the needs of the settler-colonial state, and all eight remain physically occupying stolen whenua (Kidman, 1999; A. Smith et al., 2021).
> 
> **Jack (2023, p.37)**

### Connections to today
> As such, New Zealand’s universities are rooted in colonial violence and efforts to secure the hegemonic power of the settler-colonial state by producing a particular settler workforce (and a particular Māori subject) (Kidman, 1999, 2020). Not yet dissimilar from this early function, New Zealand’s universities continue to maintain a racialised class divide within Aotearoa and enforce the onto-epistemological supremacy of white, Western knowledge and knowledge production (L. T. Smith, 2020). New Zealand’s universities were and still are institutions of settler-colonial capitalism. Neoliberalism can be understood as an ideological interlocutor of the contemporary settler-colonial state (Carey, 2016; Stein, 2022). The individualist market rationalism of neoliberal governmentality continues the state’s project of assimilation by using discourses of free choice and personal responsibility to cement the idea that colonisation has ended. This sensibility can, therefore, deny the possibility that structural racism or whiteness exists in either public or private institutions, masking the continued oppression of Indigenous and racialised people by making structural violence appear instead as the deserved consequence of poor personal choices (Yacobi & Tzfadia, 2017). This ideological interaction forms the university into a corporate machine that continues the original role of universities as a tool of capitalist, settler-colonial violence (Carey, 2016; Stein, 2022). Techniques like incorporating diversity discourses into strategic plans are operationalised to do this obscuring work (Ahmed, 2012; Carey, 2016). Further, as Mignolo (2012) writes, neoliberalism is not solely economic but a “new civilizing project” (p. 24)—neoliberalism and settler-colonialism inform the subjectification of individuals through the university, shaping which bodies and knowledge can exist within the institution and how they can do so (Ahmed, 2015). For instance, techniques like promoting very small numbers of Indigenous and racialised academics into the professoriate create a referential good institutional subject against whom others can be designated bad and governed into mimicking (Ahmed, 2015; Kidman, 2020; Naepi & Naepi, 2022). Neoliberalism allows settler-colonial universities to simultaneously negate their structure and any demands for change and capitalise on the presence of racialised bodies whilst moulding them into neoliberal subjects. Understanding the original colonial purposes of New Zealand’s universities and their more subtle neoliberal continuation provides an important context for analysing universities as institutions of neoliberal government. Examining other structuring ideologies of the university contextualises experiences specific to the Indigenous and racialised participants in this research. Further, it demonstrates that universities here were always, and remain, useful to the state for producing self-governing subjects in the interests of power. New Zealand’s white, settler-colonial, neoliberal universities are the intended products of oppressive power, explicitly designed to perform this normalising work. Tracing the development and effects of New Zealand’s universities as settler-colonial is beyond the scope of this thesis, [^11] nor is it my role as a Pākehā researcher to undertake research focused specifically on Indigenous and racialised (queer and LGBTQTakatāpui+) students in Aotearoa. Instead, this brief discussion reminds us that New Zealand’s universities have always been operants of normative power.
> 
> [^11]: See Kidman (1999) for a detailed history of pre-colonial and early colonial higher education in Aotearoa and the settler development of New Zealand’s universities. See Naepi & Leenen-Young (2021) for discussion of New Zealand’s ongoing colonial and imperial higher education in the Pacific.
> 
> **Jack (2023, p.37)**


# 1984-1990
## Fourth Labour Government
> New Zealand’s neoliberal restructuring as a whole began with the fourth Labour government in 1984, which espoused a focus on national economic recovery from the recent global recession. This project was continued into the 1990s by the subsequent National government. Characterised by mass privatisation and deregulation, the dismantling of the welfare state, and the reformation of public institutions through major funding cuts and introduction of user-pays models, the ‘New Zealand experiment’ was among the most early, rapid, and dramatic neoliberal reforms in the world at the time (Kelsey, 1997). The fallout, as canvassed comprehensively by Kelsey (1997), was widespread socio-economic inequity that disproportionately harmed working-class, Māori, and Pacific people, solidifying racialised discourse around poverty and continuing the colonial mission of systematic material and  cultural dispossession. Despite this infamously immediate catastrophic effect, neoliberal reform stayed its course, catalysing New Zealand’s shift into its current economic form (Kelsey, 1997; Shore, 2015). Like other public institutions, this neoliberal restructuring did not leave universities untouched (Shore, 2015; Shore & Davidson, 2014). In what follows, I chart the major moments in university reform for students specifically from 1984 to the present day to explore how neoliberal power has been diffused through New Zealand’s universities, producing neoliberal students and reinscribing neoliberal normativity.
> 
> **Jack (2023, p. 38)**

## Overhaul: Labour
> When David Lange’s government was elected in 1984, the existing university management system reflected the educational philosophy it had espoused during its campaign (New Zealand Labour Party [NZLP], 1984). Each university12 was effectively an autonomous institution, all but entirely state-funded through the University Grants Committee (UGC) as a mediator between universities and the government. The UGC received an annual sum based on a five- year budget determined according to inflation and equivalent full-time students (EFTS), which it was to distribute between all universities through bulk funding according to student numbers and enrolment areas. The UGC was also responsible for managing the creation of new courses of study. The government managed universities’ investments (Snook, 1991). Student fees were low and existed only to cover student services, and a wide-sweeping grants system existed to support living costs for students funded by the government through progressive taxation (Roper, 2018). For the government, funding universities and students ensured that quality and accessible education was at the heart of state responsibility for reducing socio-economic inequality through upward mobility (NZLP, 1984). This position, however, was fairly short-lived.
> 
> **Jack (2023, p.38)**

## 1984
### Treasury’s 1984 Briefing to the Incoming Minister
> The Treasury’s 1984 Briefing to the Incoming Minister was the first document to hint at the government’s impending neoliberal turn. Suggesting that the new government explore new models of privatised higher education, the Treasury argued that public funding of universities for social reasons was misguided because the nature of higher education is inherently individual and economic: Strong social policy reasons cannot readily be established for the direct government supply of tertiary services largely free at the point of consumption… education choices at this level are discretionary investment or consumption decisions (that is, tertiary education is more a private than a public [^12] good), since the individual users capture most of the benefits of higher education. (New Zealand Treasury, 1984, p. 268) Explicitly including the neoliberal (re)definition of higher education as a private investment by an individual consumer rather than a public good, this discourse would shortly justify the introduction of neoliberal legislation that would, in turn, consolidate the naturality of this claim.
>
> [^12]: Seven at the time—AUT was a polytechnic until 2000.
> 
> **Jack (2023, p.39)**


## 1987
> In 1987, the Treasury’s briefing for the government’s second term made a vociferous recommitment to these neoliberal ideals and outlined a more detailed series of recommendations for transition. Most interestingly to this research, the document fleetingly notes that higher education enables graduates to integrate culturally and socially with groups desirable by the state, instilling within graduates a respectable “knowledge and style… norms, values, and personal contacts” (p. 162). Alongside the colonial undertones, this focus is emblematic of the new subjectifying role of a neoliberal university. However, the 1987 briefing’s primary occupation was the economic function of higher education. Indeed, it states that: Education can be analysed in a similar way to any other service in terms of interaction and exchange in the face of uncertainty, information costs, scarcity, interdependence and opportunism… education shares the main characteristics of other commodities traded in the market place. (New Zealand Treasury, 1987, p. 33) Once again, the Treasury engages in a market redefinition of higher education, and then proceeds to lay out a possible course of action. Noting that information and knowledge were “the fastest developing and increasingly central areas in the modern economy” (p. 195), the brief advocated for removing state intervention in universities on the basis that it would be more efficient and economically productive for institutions to manage themselves. Freedom from the state would ameliorate a national education supply and demand mismatch by enabling institutions to focus on enrolments in vocational courses (and non-compulsory near-vocational courses, such as commerce) and facilitate better marketing of a New Zealand higher education to international students. Here, a value difference is created between good, useful (market- oriented) study and less useful (less market-oriented) study. Reinforcing the individual economic benefits of (certain kinds of) higher education orients students towards universities through a market lens and also justifies a reduction in government funding, this feeding back into the notion of higher education as a purchasable investment in the self. By now self-appointed as Minister of Education, Lange publicly rejected the neoliberal stance of the Treasury captured by these briefings. [^13] 
> 
> [^13]: This public ideological stoush continued for years—in 1988, Lange stated that he “did not measure the Treasury’s position at all; there is no way at all in which you can be equitable and leave it to the market to determine educational access” (Lange, 1988, qtd. in Patterson, 1991, p. 57). 
> 
> **Jack (2023, p.40)**


### Watts report
> Ostensibly in response to the melee, the New Zealand Vice-Chancellors’ committee commissioned the 1987 Watts report, formally New Zealand's Universities: Partners in National Development (Olssen, 2002; Snook, 1991). The report argued that New Zealand’s universities were massively under-resourced and demanded more government funding (Olssen, 2002; Snook, 1991). However, its metric was the comparative financial performance of the universities of other OECD nations—thus, despite ultimately making recommendations counter to those of the Treasury, the report is self- contradicting in already accepting the commercial purpose of a university. As Olssen (2002) notes, the Watts report foreshadows the imposition of student fees, noting that if ascertaining the proportionate public and private benefits of higher education was to be difficult, fees may become justifiable. The introduction of fees is important to students for obvious reasons—once you purchase something, you are an invested consumer. Interestingly, the report also marks the first use of the public versus private good discourse to make actual policy recommendations. At the same time, the government was working on its own report. 
> 
> **Jack (2023)**


## 1988
### Hawke Report
> In 1988, a working group presented Hawke’s [^14] Report on Post-Compulsory Education and Training in New Zealand to the Cabinet Social Equity Committee. Meant to review existing documents, the report instead built on the loose imperatives of the 1987 Treasury briefing to lay out stringent recommendations for increasing the contribution that universities could make to the national economy (Patterson, 1991). It made several recommendations, including proposing the establishment of a Ministry of Education and the consequent disestablishment of the UGC, which universities roundly critiqued as a mechanism to induce intra-sector competition for funding (Olssen, 2002; Patterson, 1991). In a similar vein, Hawke also suggests that universities should compete for higher proportions of private funding, commercialise aspects of research, appoint Vice-chancellors as CEOs, increase the use of charters, audits, and performance reviews for staff, and separate research and teaching. Neoliberal changes to the funding of universities like these would be necessary to corporatise the management and behaviour of universities. For students in particular, the report recommended increasing student fees and introducing a loan system. The Hawke report is the first to fully depict the contemporarily recognisable neoliberal form of New Zealand’s universities—commercialised and competitive institutions producing students as individualistic, entrepreneurial, and self-regulating future workers (Shore, 2015).
> 
> [^14]: Interestingly, Gary Hawke was a professor of economic history rather than an education scholar, as would perhaps have been expected.
> 
> **Jack (2023, p.40)**

## 1989 & 1990
### Learning for Life I & II
> In 1989, two policy documents were released that would hone the Hawke report's recommendations and precede the Education Act 1989: Learning for Life I and Learning for Life II. Suggesting that the tertiary system was struggling because it was hyper-fragmented, the two documents together make two changes with particular implications for universities. First, the funding of universities, polytechnics, and wānanga, all of which had previously had individual systems, would be synthesised—the UGC would be abolished, universities would be bulk funded on a per-student basis untethered from inflation, and institutions would control their entire financial management. Second, Vice-Chancellors would become CEOs of universities defined by their research roles, the employer of all staff and themselves contracted to the Ministry of Education through a series of charters designed to concretise their responsibility to the state. In tandem, these would increase competition between all tertiary education institutions for students and funding—semi-privatisation and introducing competition was to be the cure for a disconnected sector. In order to maintain institutional viability and accountability to the state, universities would have to start selling themselves to students, making desirable promises in order to garner enrolments and, therefore, capital.
> 
> **Jack (2023, p.41)**

### Education Act 1989 & Education Amendment Act 1990
> The eventual Education Act 1989 consolidated some of the Learning for Life recommendations and introduced some means-testing to student support schemes (New Zealand University Students’ Association [NZUSA], n.d.). However, the Education Amendment Act 1990 was where the bulk of the changes listed in the paragraph above were enacted. The broad intent of the legislation was to streamline the national tertiary system, offering universities independence from the state conditional on their resource efficiency and accountability (Patterson, 1991). For students—continuing an emerging theme—the 1990 legislation also allowed for the introduction of course fees. The 1990 fee was $1250, and the percentage of this that would be paid corresponded to students’ parental income, though there was a minimum of 10%. Though the full fee is small by today’s standards,[^15] it amounted to a 1000% increase over a single year (Patterson, 1991; Snook, 1991; Roper, 2018). The introduction of high fees for tertiary study is widely regarded as the cornerstone technique for the positioning of higher education as a personal investment (Brooks et al., 2021; Krause- Jensen & Garsten, 2014; Lolich, 2011; Molesworth et al., 2009; Saunders, 2010; Shore, 2015). As the initiator of neoliberal reform, the government restructured individual universities into a corporate configuration, laying the neoliberal groundwork for the incoming National government to hone more precisely (Shore 2008; 2010). The new commercial structure of universities, alongside a more competitive funding model, necessitated that institutions compete for students by beginning to develop a recognisable brand and unique promises. However, the defining feature during this first stage of reform was the discursive redefinition of higher education as a private good, a personal investment. Though students have arguably always been treated in consumer-like ways by universities (Saunders, 2010), neoliberal reform presents the first explicit efforts to produce students in such a way where a consumer/service-provider relation to staff overrides the traditional mentee/mentor one (Ball, 2012; Ball & Olmedo, 2013; Giroux, 2014; Lolich, 2011; Saunders, 2010). Through discussing the purpose and outcomes of university study in financial terms, students are reoriented towards universities through market terms. The rational outcome of a cost/benefit analysis with regard to their future, going to university becomes a responsible use of the newfound freedom of neoliberalism—the acquisition of highly employable skills offers a leg-up towards securing high-income work, personal wealth, and the good life which comes with that (Brookes et al., 2021; Krause-Jensen & Garsten, 2014; Lolich, 2011; Shore, 2015). 
>
> [^15]: Adjusted for inflation, it would have been just over $2500 in 2022 terms.
> 
> **Jack (2023, p.41)**

# 1990-1999
## Settling In: National, 1990-1999
### The fourth National government, Ruth Richardson's 'mother of all budgets'
> The fourth National government, elected in 1990, accelerated and solidified New Zealand’s neoliberal restructuring. Finance Minister Ruth Richardson’s infamous ‘mother of all budgets’ was released in 1991, continuing the privatisation of state assets, dramatically slashing social welfare spending, and public institutions, including education, were fully introduced to the free market (Kelsey, 1997; Peters et al., 1992). In terms of higher education, the new government built upon the framework laid out by recent legislation and the Hawke report. Although the government would remain the primary financier of universities, it reduced this quite markedly, necessitating that universities turn towards private funding through ever-increasing fees and commercialisation. Forcing institutions to be more responsive to the market in this way was implemented to make universities more efficient and encourage their uptake of corporate managerialism (Olssen, 2002). Cost-cutting and uninhibited embrace of the free market were at the core of National’s tertiary policy.
> 
> **Jack (2023, p.42)**

## 1991
### National's Tertiary Review report
> In 1991, the government released its Tertiary Review report. With the government focused on reducing state expenditure and retreating from public institutions, predictably, the report’s recommendations revolved around student fees and loans. The previous government’s fees had already increased with the new year (Roper, 2018), but the report suggested a target for students to meet a minimum of 20% of their course costs but where institutions could set their own fees, coupled with the removal of the pre-existing means-tested allowance. Student allowances were to become strictly income-tested and age-restricted, and a student loan scheme was to be developed. To reduce welfare expenditure, universities would receive additional funding for enrolling students receiving state benefits. Loans were introduced as scheduled in 1992, resulting in around two-thirds of students taking on a loan almost immediately (Roper, 2018). Again, the introduction of a user-pays model of education is critical to solidifying higher education as a private investment, and the more expensive the initial investment is, the greater the perceived necessity to make it worthwhile (Brooks et al., 2021; Krause-Jensen & Garsten, 2014; Lolich, 2011; Molesworth et al., 2009; Saunders, 2010; Shore, 2015). Regardless of the introduction of fees and loans, the next few years saw unprecedented increases in tertiary participation (Olssen, 2002). The growing student numbers, counterproductively for the government, had meant a corresponding increase in government expenditure in real terms and an inefficient increase in staff workloads (Olssen, 2002). Arguably, it also reflects student buy-in to neoliberal constructions of higher education as a personal investment. 
> 
> **Jack (2023, p.42)**

## 1994
### Todd taskforce’s Funding Growth in Tertiary Education and Training
> Thus, in 1994, the Todd taskforce’s Funding Growth in Tertiary Education and Training noted that because the direction of the global market meant that to participate, nationally or overseas, most citizens would need higher education, student course contributions should be raised to 25%. In doing so, an alternative model was rejected in which higher-income students would have paid higher fees to finance Māori and low-income student support. Though it had little material effect in its own right, this report evidences the complete turn away from the equity function of higher education, which was preeminent only a decade ago.
> 
> **Jack (2023, p.43)**

## 1997
### A Future Tertiary Education Policy for New Zealand: Tertiary Education Review
> In 1997, the government released a Green Paper, A Future Tertiary Education Policy for New Zealand: Tertiary Education Review. This paper was a review that, yet again, focussed on managing fees and expenditure in response to increased demand, and it toyed with the idea of removing the EFTS cap to allow fees to rise and reduce real-terms government spending on university funding.
> 
> **Jack (2023, p.43)**

## 1998
### Tertiary Education in New Zealand: Policy Directions for the 21st Century
> The White Paper, Tertiary Education in New Zealand: Policy Directions for the 21st Century (1998), was the final major report that consolidated the neoliberal transformation of New Zealand’s universities barely a decade after it began in earnest. The paper opens by claiming that “a well-performing tertiary sector will… improve New Zealand’s competitive edge, economic growth, employment opportunities, productivity, and social cohesion” (p. 4). Occupied with creating a system of financing and governance that would allow the efficient and productive function of universities in a global market, the paper signalled that the EFTS cap was to be removed, the government would partially subsidise tuition based on student numbers but students would largely fund their own “investment” (p. 55), and funding would be shared with private tertiary providers to increase competition. The White Paper performs the final stages of the corporatisation of universities and formalises the student-provider “contract” (p. 55) of higher education. The National government’s treatment of higher education finalised the vision of its predecessor, able to work with the understanding of higher education as a private good to fully marketise the sector (Shore, 2008, 2010). As scholars argue, neoliberalism proclaims the retraction of the state and so more autonomy for institutions, but instead utilises state power to facilitate the free operation of capital and perform more subtle control of institutions and the people subject to them. New Zealand’s universities, seemingly now free to manage themselves to excel in the free market, have their choices carefully regulated by neoliberal interests rather than being managed by the state in a more evident, top-down manner (Jakobsen, 2007; Olssen, 2002; Saunders, 2010). The effect is similar for students. Having been governed into a market orientation towards university through discourses of personal investment, this stage of neoliberal reform saw a consequent massification of university study and significantly increased student fees. If more students are investing in themselves through going to university, then new forms of competition and entrepreneurialism emerge as a means to gain competitive advantage. Moreover, as the size of the investment increases, the stakes of ensuring that it will provide worthwhile returns are heightened, producing competitive, entrepreneurial students who see those as a logical necessity and govern themselves accordingly (Beban & Trueman, 2018; Ball & Olmedo, 2013; Krause-Jensen & Garsten, 2014; Molesworth et al., 2009). In this way, though outwardly appearing to have more liberty over their own choices, these marketised students are enacting the interests of neoliberalism as if they are their own. New Normal: 2000-Present The neoliberal transformation of New Zealand through major legislation came to a halt around the turn of the millennium. New Zealand’s Universities, now governed by high-level administrative staff and with a greater obligation to serve the neoliberal interests of the state, private financiers, and students, had undergone a fundamental change in purpose (Olssen & Peters, 2005). Though the government continued to have a strong hand in managing New Zealand’s universities, this regulation was enacted through funding reallocations, policy, and minor legislative amendments that accrued little public interest outside university communities (Roper, 2018). 
> 
> **Jack (2023, p.43)**

# 2000 onwards
> The following outline of neoliberal changes in New Zealand’s university system since 2000 is non-exhaustive, focusing specifically on moments that have fine-tuned the neoliberal government of students until the present day.
> 
> **Jack (2023, p.45)**

## 2001
### Inquiry into Student Fees, Loans, Allowances and the Overall Resourcing of Tertiary Education
> In 2001, Labour established the Tertiary Education Advisory Commission (TEAC). Influenced by the 2001 Inquiry into Student Fees, Loans, Allowances and the Overall Resourcing of Tertiary Education, TEAC instigated the write-off of student loan interest and the development of equity scholarships. Temporary fee stabilisation was also instituted (Roper, 2018). This development is particularly interesting because it suggests a return to focusing on equity of access just eight years after the Todd taskforce denigrated the idea, albeit within the established neoliberal framework.
> 
> **Jack (2023, p.45)**

## 2002
### Tertiary Education Commission, PBRF
> The Tertiary Education Commission (TEC) replaced TEAC in 2002 at its own recommendation. The TEC is responsible for mandating periodic tertiary education strategies (TES) and monitoring the performance of tertiary education institutions. The inaugural TES (2002-2007) for students reiterated the importance of increasing participation and successful outcomes for Māori, Pacific, and low-income students, finalised the removal of loan interest for all students residing in New Zealand, but ended the fee freeze and instead allowing raises with limitations. Moreover, the introduction of the Performance Based Research Fund— critiqued as a surveilling practice of neoliberal managerialism (e.g. Cupples & Pawson, 2012)—placed new pressures and restrictions on staff, which solidified their service-provider relationship with students (Molesworth et al., 2009; Saunders, 2010; Shore, 2015). The TES (2007-2012) mirrored the vision of the first.
> 
> **Jack (2023, p.45)**

## 2008
### National reelected
> When National was re-elected amidst the global financial crisis in 2008, their policy forefronted austerity through a series of incremental but meaningful changes. Able to justify an unwillingness to provide any significant funding increases for universities because of the economic downturn, the TES (2010-2015) amounted to a real terms decline in EFTS funding and student financial support (Roper, 2018). In their second term, with a corresponding focus on economic recovery, the TES (2014-2019) pivoted to achieving the workforce development required for globally competitive economic growth—funding increases were frozen for humanities enrolments and increased for STEM enrolments. The document’s suggestion that “tertiary education provides individuals and communities with the opportunity to improve their own social outcomes by gaining the skills they need to become successful and productive citizens” (Ministry of Education, 2014, p. 7) maintains the neoliberal conception of higher education by students and engineers the devaluing of non-vocational study, binding the idea of a successful, fulfilling life to productivity and wealth. Moreover, the consequent restructuring of underfunded departments reinforced the need for staff to prioritise neoliberal drivers rather than pedagogical ones to remain employable, reproducing the consumer-student.
> 
> **Jack (2023, p.45)**

## 2011
### the Education (Freedom of Association) Amendment Act
> As a surreptitious but effective means of cost-cutting across multiple fronts, the Education (Freedom of Association) Amendment Act 2011 [^16] introduced voluntary student union membership. The result was a massive decline in membership and a corresponding fall in union funding. Already financially precarious, the power of student unions as both advocacy groups and funders for other student organisations and services was undercut (Nissen & Hayward, 2016). Student groups vehemently opposed the bill, including queer students’ associations, who were aware that it would decrease their funding and thus the ability to organise community-building and political events on campus (GayNZ, 2010). The surgical dismantling of student collectivity, much like other union-busting activity, further individualises students and facilitates their further neoliberal regulation. In the wake of the bill being passed, the government slashed student allowance spending over the next five years and the loan repayment rate was increased, both with little meaningful opposition from increasingly atomised students (Nissen & Hayward, 2016).
>
> [^16]: Interestingly, the bill was sponsored by Roger Douglas, who was by this time a Member of Parliament for the ACT Party.
> 
> **Jack (2023, p.46)**

## 2020
### The Education and Training Act 2020
> The Education and Training Act 2020 marked little change for tertiary education specifically. The legislation all but directly incorporated the Education Act 1989, except to give Te Tiriti o Waitangi greater effect and enable easier prosecution of student loan offences. The former decree is reflected in the current TES (2020), which prioritises Māori equity strategies, the incorporation of te reo and tikanga Māori into institutions, and the development of mātauranga Māori, alongside a host of other inclusion and anti-discrimination goals. The prominent focus on diversity and inclusion in the current TES, particularly for Māori and Pacific students, is especially notable. Every TES to date notes the importance of increasing Māori and Pacific student participation rates and post-study market participation, presenting Māori and Pacific students as a grouped market failure that could be remedied through higher education. The TES 2020 is the first to present a mechanism for doing so—in the first four TESs, mention of diversity or inclusion happens only three times across all reports as part of an objective or mission statement relative to students. The sudden pivot to diversity discourse calls to mind Ahmed (2012, 2015), who explains how institutions use diversity to manage minority groups and prioritise non-transformative change with market benefits for the institution over creating equitable universities. In this way, the neoliberal production of marketised students also appears to have a racialised element. Most students entering New Zealand’s universities from the late 2000s onwards have “grown up neoliberal” (Beban & Trueman, 2018, p. 106), the idea that higher education is a self-investment to be purchased as a key to the good life more a natural fact than a new and imposed idea. With that market orientation maintained through ever-growing fees, the majority of tertiary policy over the last two decades has focused largely on the corporatisation of New Zealand’s universities to enhance the global competitiveness of the national economy in the interests of capital. It has been the (preordained) responses to these policies by individual institutions that have shaped student subjectivity into its present-day form. Specifically, changes in government priorities driven by both austerity and economic recovery induce institutional restructuring, which takes shape around funding allocations. This adjustment has multiple effects. Namely, redundancies increase staff-to-student ratios through larger class sizes and the employment insecurity of staff encourages a marketised pedagogy (Krause-Jensen & Garsten, 2014; Molesworth et al., 2009; Saunders, 2010). In turn, classes become more impersonal, and the use of standardised assessment and student ranking as a way of evidencing the success of a course grows. Made hyper-aware of their peers, of whom there are many, and their achievements, students become increasingly competitive and self- interested in pursuit of maximising returns on their investment (Ball, 2012; Beban & Trueman, 2018; Krause-Jensen & Garsten, 2014; Shore, 2015). In this regard, students choose extracurriculars for their social and cultural capital to enhance their unique employability, entrepreneurs assembling a market identity (Breathnach, 2014; Varman et al., 2011). [^17] The financial support and the prestige—the proof of hard work—of highly limited but highly desired performance-based incentives like excellence scholarships only reinforce these relations of competition and individualism (Krause-Jensen & Garsten, 2014; Lolich, 2011; Molesworth et al., 2009; Saunders, 2010). When the government designates particular kinds of study as valuable (profitable) and others as not so, with a financial imperative attached, the response of universities is to protect their financial viability as a business, thus reinscribing neoliberal discourses. In this way, neoliberal universities prepare students for the market by producing good, self-governing market actors. These outcomes are maximised by the disassembling of student solidarity. The financial strangulation of student unions means that only societies and activities that are economically self-sufficient or highly profitable are viable as budgets tighten (O’Hagan Brebner, 2021). Nissen and Hayward (2016) note that as a result, student unions must market themselves towards either their university or private donors in order to acquire funding, and as a result, “the goals of the association must be aligned with those of the commercialised university” (p. 139). In turn, the kinds of clubs and events that manage to sustain themselves are usually those which align with the market interests of the university, and increasingly, this is what students are coming to desire, too. Students, therefore, have less opportunity to form community around shared experiences in general, and any student community-building tends to coagulate around a market interest (Nissen & Hayward, 2016). Further, this lack of student solidarity and collective politics reduces the potential for organising against attacks on student well-being (Nissen & Hayward, 2016; Roper, 2018).
>
> [^17]: Conveniently for the market, neoliberal competition has also led to some students paying exorbitant fees for the aid of elite consultants like Crimson Education. See Slade (2019) for an interesting investigation into Crimson.
> 
> **Jack (2023, p.46)**

## 2023
> In 2023, New Zealand’s universities are in crisis. Hundreds of redundancies have been announced across the sector, more loom, and entire departments are being cut or drastically restructured (Heagney, 2023). An emergency stimulation package announced by the government is expected to have little preventative effect (Tertiary Education Union [TEU], 2023). Universities and the government have blamed the COVID-19 recession for declining enrolments and an inability to increase funding (McNeilly, 2023). However, the TEU has drawn attention to the preceding decades of systematic underfunding and neoliberal governance canvassed above—between 2009-2018, cumulative tertiary underfunding amounted to an estimated $3.7 billion (Roper, 2023). The New Zealand Union of Students’ Associations (NZUSA) and Te Mana Ākonga have also connected these issues to neoliberal governance outside of tertiary education. With the phasing in of first-year free fees from 2018 unmatched by a sufficient increase in living support, inflation and a pre-existing housing crisis have ballooned living costs beyond sustainable levels for many students (NZUSA et al., 2022; Shaw, 2017). The treatment of students by universities during the pandemic lockdowns has also drawn ire, contributing to a sense of feeling undervalued for students (NZUSA et al., 2022). It seems that neoliberal universities may have dug their own grave—in a sector where the last four decades have instilled the primacy of higher education as an individual investment towards the good life, the production of neoliberal subjects appears to have been so effective that New Zealand’s universities simply cannot treat their customers well enough or offer a quality product such that students are taking their business elsewhere. A detailed understanding of how students have been and are governed into neoliberal subjectivity is critical to exploring student experiences of universities, particularly as the institutions themselves teeter on the precipice.
> 
> **Jack (2023, p.48)**