---
slug: loans-simply-to-live-greens-join-student-protest
title: "Loans simply to live: Greens join student protest"
date: 2008-01-25
source-url: https://www.scoop.co.nz/stories/PA0801/S00188/loans-simply-to-live-greens-join-student-protest.htm
author: green-party
---
Loans simply to live: Greens join student protest
=================================================

**Friday, 25 January 2008, 12:07 am**  
**Press Release: [Green Party](https://info.scoop.co.nz/Green_Party)**

25th January 2008

Loans simply to live: Greens join student protest

Green Party Education Spokesperson Metiria Turei is to join tertiary  
students at Parliament to protest student allowance polices which have  
forced the average student debt up to nearly $30,000.

The Green Party's cooperation agreement with the Government requires  
them to make budget allocations for raising parental income thresholds  
which will increase the number of students eligible for student  
allowances.

"The Green Party wants to make sure the number of students getting  
full allowances increases, as that is where the real need is," Mrs  
Turei says.

"If the Government simply raises the top threshold, so that more  
students are entitled to $20 a week, it will be a failure to meet our  
agreement and a gross insult to students."

New research released today shows that just to cover essential living  
costs, students are required to take out bank loans and use overdrafts  
and credit cards.

"There is no justification for students being the only group in  
society forced to borrow simply to live.

"This inequity is directly reflected in a significant reduction of  
enrolments from students from poorer backgrounds, down from 15 percent  
in 2004 to 6 percent in 2007.

"The new research shows that 88 percent of students believe that  
loans, which are taken out just to survive, will have some impact on  
their ability to buy a house.

"Over a third say it will impact other important life decisions such  
as when to have children and ability to save for the future.

Advertisement - scroll to continue reading





"These are significant decisions that no previous generation has had  
to consider on the basis of a crippling loan often acquired while  
still a teenager and in the early twenties.

"Universal student allowances must be restored if we are to deal with  
the ramifications of a generation growing up in debt such as the loss  
of our graduates to overseas jobs, the inability to get into the  
housing market, and the forced delay starting families," Mrs Turei  
says.

"The fact is that Government policies are falling far short of a fair  
deal for tertiary students who are being compelled out of the country,  
either to earn enough to pay off their debt or to avoid it  
altogether."

ENDS

[© Scoop Media](http://www.scoop.co.nz/about/terms.html)  

Advertisement - scroll to continue reading



a.supporter:hover {background:#EC4438!important;} @media screen and (max-width: 480px) { #byline-block div.byline-block {padding-right:16px;}}

### Using Scoop for work?

Scoop is free for personal use, but you’ll need a licence for work use. This is part of our Ethical Paywall and how we fund Scoop. Join today with plans starting from less than $3 per week, plus gain access to exclusive _Pro_ features.  
  
[Join Pro Individual](https://pro.scoop.co.nz/Individual/?from=ProIn24) [Find out more](https://pro.scoop.co.nz/using-scoop-for-work/?from=ProIn24)

Find more from [Green Party](https://info.scoop.co.nz/Green_Party) on InfoPages.