---
title: "University union welcomes call for investment"
slug: university-union-welcomes-call-for-investment
date: 2003-12-04
source: https://www.scoop.co.nz/stories/ED0312/S00029/university-union-welcomes-call-for-investment.htm
source-name: Scoop
author: Association of University Staff
author-slug: association-of-university-staff
---

<p><img align="left" width="85" height="85" src="http://www.aus.ac.nz/pictures/logo.gif" alt="AUS WEB SITE" border="0">The Association of
University Staff (AUS today welcomed the statement from the
Associate Minister of Education (Tertiary) Steve Maharey
that more investment is needed in the university system.
<br>Delegates to the AUS annual conference, being held in
Wellington this week, were told by Mr. Maharey today that
additional funding, over and above that already proposed for
targeted initiatives, was needed within in the sector but
said it would more likely come initially from a
redistribution of existing resources.<br>Conference
delegates said that while the Minister needed to ensure that
additional funding was allocated for universities in next
year’s Budget, the $19 million that had not been spent in
the private tertiary sector this year could be immediately
reallocated to universities. “This would show some genuine
desire to resolve funding difficulties,” said AUS National
President Dr. Bill Rosenberg.<br>Mr. Maharey told the AUS
conference that a number of new initiatives would focus on
building capacity and assisting the sector “to transition to
the new tertiary environment”. He outlined details of a
planned Review of the Tertiary Education Workforce which
will be conducted over 2004 and the first half of 2005; a
Review of Quality designed to enhance the quality of
teaching and learning; and the proposed teaching performance
element of the funding framework.<br>Mr. Maharey said he
intended to work with stakeholders, including staff and
students, to identify needs that the tertiary education
system, aligned with the Tertiary Education Strategy, will
be required to meet in the future. He gave several examples,
such as the Canterbury Tertiary Alliance, where efficiencies
within the system could “flourish and contribute to an
improved sector performance”.<br>In response to questions,
Mr. Maharey said that the establishment and compliance costs
would also reduce with the on-going implementation of the
Performance-based Research Fund.<p>

<p>Ends</p>

<p>For further
information please contact<br>Dr Bill
Rosenberg					<br>National President, AUS				<br>Phone 	(03)
364 2801 (work)				<br>(03) 332 8525 (home)	 					<br>021
680 475 (mobile) 						<br>Email
	bill.rosenberg@canterbury.ac.nz	<br><p>




<!--


