---
title: "Protest Reclaim Victoria University Take Back The Hub"
slug: protest-reclaim-victoria-university-take-back-the-hub
date: 2014-07-24
source: https://youtube.com/watch?v=5BOsqZFbzNc
author: Heleyni Pratley
author-slug: heleyni-pratley
---

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/5BOsqZFbzNc?si=66Pmory_e1UIUS1a" title="YouTube video player" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture; web-share" referrerpolicy="strict-origin-when-cross-origin" allowfullscreen></iframe>

[reclaimvic](https://www.facebook.com/ReclaimVic)

"Student Activism Still Alive at Victoria." Newly formed student activist group Reclaim Vic are set to host their first public speaker event this Wednesday at 2pm. The Victoria University student led group formed in response to the increasing corporatisation of the tertiary sector. "We believe that education should be an equitable and accessible public good, and are concerned about the ongoing corporatization and commodification of our post-secondary institutions, said spokesperson Joshua James. "Education is not a consumer product." The group in particular opposes ongoing maximum fee rises, reduced access to loans and allowances, ongoing cuts to courses and staff, restrictions on academic freedoms and exclusion of students at high level university decisions. The public event entitled "Neoliberalism and the University" will feature a number of guest speakers, including Sandra Grey, Teresia Teaiwa, John Dennison, Fleur Fitzsimons and a soap box style open mic. It is to take place in the newly refurbished Hub, a space which currently does not allow student events. "The majority of the hub was funded by students", spokesperson Joshua James said. "The fact that it is run as a commercial space, and that outside of VUWSA, students are effectively barred from holding meetings here is ridiculous. We believe we have a right to meet and talk openly at our own campus about issues that affect us as students." The event is to be held at the Hub, at Wellington's Kelburn campus at 2pm this Wednesday 23rd July.

---

about the role of the university in
neoliberalism this Hub was paid for by
student money millions of dollars of
student money has gone into this Hub and
one of our things is actually that we
need to bring our discussions as
students whether they're Whimsical or
serious or a bit of both into this place
the university and the critic and
conscience of society really great to be
here back in a place where I was once
trespassed for protesting Joel was
kicked off University Ian was also
kicked out for filming what he's doing
now um so you know this university has a
pretty Draconian record under the
University's current rules and
regulations we're not allowed to be here
today you're not allowed to hold student
demonstrations here with the exception
of vous who is allowed to um no student
groups or clubs are allowed to use this
Central Area you're allowed to use a
small section of the foyer on the second
floor like a hallway if you book it and
if you're a registered Club if you're
not it costs three grand to use a
hallway we don't have three grand so
we're doing it here
um as well as that yeah there's an
effective ban on most student lead
events or meetings here and it's
governed by a lot of other restrictions
you're not allowed to sell or give away
free food inside the Hub because this
conflicts commercial interests we think
this is a bit since the Hub is
student funded you should be able to do
what you want so hence free food um
you're also not allowed to post notices
or posters anywhere inside the central
part of the Hub any groups who do are
threatened with cleanup costs apparently
sell tape is a health and safety
issue uh some other restrictions are a
bit unclear but um various groups like
generation Zero have had trouble with
handing out flyers beside a giant BL
dinosaur they were us to leave so no
dinosaurs uh in effect we think the
Central Social space of this campus is
being run along similar grounds to a
shopping
mall yeah um and there's something very
wrong with us I think it shouldn't be a
shopping mall it should be a space where
we feel comfortable coming and and
sharing and being able to talk about
these issues um it was paid by a
majority of funding from V so it's
student funded um and the rest from of
course student fees and taxpayer funding
as students of the University this
should be our space It should be serving
our needs and not the business interests
of those who pay rent um so despite
being declined permission to hold our
meeting here today we've decided to go
ahead with it we think it's really
really important that we can reclaim
this area as a space for
students um a space to talk and freely
and openly to meet and and discuss
issues that are important to us um and
to hold events and promote events this
space has got so much potential um to be
full of life and vibrancy we need to
take back public tery education grant
recently wrote that he sees this as a
public Civic University we give
yourselves a round of applause this is
the public Civic University in action
this is what a public Civic University
looks like Can't Stand By and Watch
University be marketized commercialized
consumerized and all those things that
are dismantling good quality education
it is time to reclaim Victoria New
Zealand's public Civic University let's
live by that slogan and make sure we
lead the way in pushing back against all
that makes education a marketable
product rather than something for the
public good it's absolutely critical
that staff and students unite in the
constant battle to reclaim the
university there's a constant battle
between managerialism corporatism and
public good education and I think you've
got to keep fighting the fight fighting
the casualization of University
Workforce anyone who wants to be
involved can Contracting out to the
cleaners and so on that's a really
precarious low wage industry that
they've created there our next event
we're going to try and team up with some
students in Christ Church and the
reclaim UA group they've called like a
nationwide day of student action and
they're proposing putting forth a
nationwide statement and S of Demands as
well as like each individual campus
putting forth their own specific demands
we want to be super Democratic so we're
going to have a meeting next Wednesday
just to help develop the demands sort of
in a democratic way part of our job is
actually to step up and be that critic
and conscience of society