---
title: "Auck students concerned over negotiation breakdown"
slug: auck-students-concerned-over-negotiation-breakdown
date: 2005-06-21
source: https://www.scoop.co.nz/stories/ED0506/S00058/auck-students-concerned-over-negotiation-breakdown.htm
source-name: Scoop
author: Auckland University Students Association
author-slug: auckland-university-students-association
---

<p>Auckland students concerned over negotiation breakdown<p>

<p>University of Auckland students today expressed concern
over the breakdown in negotiations between the University
unions and Vice Chancellors in Christchurch and the
possibility of prolonged industrial action. Auckland
University Student’s Association President Greg Langton said
he was worried about the effects on students of any ongoing
strikes during Semester Two. “The Union has indicated that
their first day of national action is likely to be July 20,
three days into the new semester”, he said. “Obviously we’re
anxious about how that will affect students, particularly if
it signals the beginning of a long period of
instability”</p>

<p>Mr. Langton called on both parties to show
good faith and commit themselves to negotiations, to ensure
a fair solution was reached as early as possible. “The
earlier negotiations resume, the earlier strikes end and the
earlier students can get on with what they’re here to do –
learn” he said.</p>

<p>AUSA Education Vice President Xavier
Goldie said that students support the staff and Unions in
their work to achieve fair pay, but were becoming
increasingly concerned that they were being stuck in the
middle. “These are our teachers and educators who do a
fantastic job, so of course we support them in their fight
to get paid their worth” he said, “we just hope that both
sides continue to recognise that students are the ones
ultimately affected by disrupted classes”.<p>

<p>Mr. Goldie
added that the Union had indicated they were keenly aware of
the effects of industrial action on students, and
acknowledged that their actions so far had been implemented
in a way that minimised the impact on students’ academic
outcomes.</p>

<p>ENDS<br><p>
         