---
title: Occupation of Auckland University 14 sept 2011
slug: occupation-of-auckland-university-14-sept-2011
date: 2011-09-15
source: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6CxTypna-wI
source_name:  palestinehumanrights
author: palestinehumanrights
author-slug: palestinehumanrights
---

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/6CxTypna-wI?si=y7NOrbIoQ362K6PI" title="YouTube video player" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture; web-share" referrerpolicy="strict-origin-when-cross-origin" allowfullscreen></iframe>

uni protest 14 sept 2011

---

[Music]
your pass stand you know hold your
head What's the de can you explain to us
what's Happening
Here What's Happening Here uh we we just
occupied the University our demands stop
the vice Chancellor's attack on uh the
academic staff no fear Rises this year
stop voluntary student mhip democratize
University governance and University
student alls as you can see the police
here have responded with
[ __ ] uh 100% aggression and uh attack
the university this is an attack on the
University this is an attack on
students OCC the unity police have
occupied the
University
he what's your
name stay
down uh this was just a collection of
students that came together to talk
about sustain ideological tax on
education in this country and uh things
sort of progress to the along the lines
there was a a little bit of um
intimidation from the security guards so
we decided we wanted a peaceful place to
talk through some of these ideas and uh
as the aggression from the status quo
grew we we uh barricaded the doors and
and continued the conversation you must
have been aware there was going to be a
confrontation though because we I mean
that was never an intention the idea was
to to have a conversation about the the
particular things that are going on
within the university and within
education in New Zealand and we have a
right to be here yeah and we have a
right to be here we this is our
University this is our University and
and you know a lot of us pay a lot of
money to be here it's supposedly an open
space for open ideas where we able to
share our creative ideas about what the
university should be the Democratic
process with within this this University
and other universities in this country
under sustained attack we take that up
onto the foot that great cheers thank
you well this was this this was part of
a nationwide day of action so there were
a few things
um one there's there's an ongoing
struggle within this particular
University with the the teachers
education Union um Stuart McCutchen is
trying to remove some of the um more
democratic process that go into uh the
sort of job construction essentially
he's trying to um change the the
conditions that they already have um so
moving things out of contract and into
policy so that he has some sort of
dictatorial control um you know it's
it's it's part of a long process of
watering down the the quality of
Education in this country and and we
think it's about time that someone some
people stops to talk about that so this
was a place to come together and talk
about that yeah yeah I heard talk about
student rights are on the tech yeah how
committed are you to to occupying the
university well we we're going to see
and we we'll see if uh if the students
come back together I you know we already
know that news of what we've done here
tonight has circulated to other parts of
the country and other students around
the world are talking about it well this
is something that's happening all over
the world students are are coming
together and taking back Democratic
power that they have that's
theirs thank you very
much what do we want student rights when
do we want it what do we want student
right when do we want it you're under
attack stand up fight back student
rights are under attack stand up F back
student rights are under attack stand up
fight back stand up fight back stand up
we freedom is under attack stand
[Applause]
up
[Applause]
you want to give a statement what
happened here tonight um well what
happened was um I've got your wallet
thank you um what happened was we um
we're trying to tell the VC we have a
conversation with the VC didn't take it
too well um the university is ours and
we are claiming it and um just thought
you should
know you want to give a statement uh
we're out here in front of the centr
city police station uh about an hour ago
we just left the University where we had
occupied the library basement demanding
um of course free education a universal
student allowance um greater student
union rights um and also um for the
government to completely scrap the
voluntary student
unionship the police arrested um as far
as aware uh one girl harer outside and
two other dudes outside um the library
based who are supporting us they also
then when we were all coming out at the
very end they picked off some random guy
and they arrested him and now they think
that's all right they have no reason to
we were democratically
protesting so we out
here demanding freedom for the rest of
the people who are R now holler one of
the
risk has already been released but still
the others have to be released and
that's why we're out here demanding
their released
immedi get arrested for something you
know and I agree with get busted for
thought for you will be arrested for
your
thoughts we're prosecuted because we're
different you know because we weren't
bow to the status quo and because you
know we [ __ ] shouldn't have to we
live in a country with a democracy and
we can't even stay in a building past
9:00 p. because they tell us we can't we
pay our fees we go to these universities
to learn and if we want to learn we need
to stay there until we finished [ __ ]
learning not when they say so and not
when they lock the door on
[Applause]
[Applause]
us
okay now the police have warned us that
this loud Halo is too bloody loud
because we're trying to address our Us
in this corrupt system on how corrupt
this whole system is and how much we
have come here to show our support for
our brother who got locked up for
absolutely nothing for fighting for his
rights as students for fighting for us
rights as a human
being so the police have given us 10
minutes to shut this loud ha out because
these rich Fells in these hotels
are probably mining because us freedom
fighters protect the gates Jo are
here let us all be
free the
police the police said that um they're
going to release him because he didn't
he did nothing
wrong on the on the conditions that we
walk away and they'll let them go walk
away when they let them go when they
come out then we will all walk relas
[Music]
the
nowy we just hang out here for another
hour then back to the university
[Music]
he just explained that um if we leave
he'll he'll get released both of them um
if we stick around uh they won't release
them and and and and the police uh he
said that they'll be happy to stand here
because they're getting
paid um and they're taking our taxpayers
money to stand here um to to protect
this corrupt
system he's didn't giving me the note
yeah he
knows ho ho hey ho Johnson gota
go

