---
slug: employment-relations-(film-production-work)-bill
title: "Employment Relations (Film Production Work) Bill"
date: 2010-10-29
source-url: https://www.scoop.co.nz/stories/PA1010/S00522/employment-relations-film-production-work-bill.htm
author: te-pati-maori
---
Employment Relations (Film Production Work) Bill
================================================

**Friday, 29 October 2010, 3:36 pm**  
**Speech: [The Maori Party](https://info.scoop.co.nz/The_Maori_Party)**

**Speech : Employment Relations (Film Production Work) Amendment Bill**  
**Third Reading; Friday 29 October 2010**  
**Rahui Katene**

As we have debated this Bill under urgency, it has been clear that although not all of the unions have been cheering in support, that those within the film productive industry itself have - in general terms –been broadly in agreement with the fundamental purpose of the Bill.

In fact when the news first came through about the incentive package put together to resolve the economic concerns of the Warners, one of the first statements through was from New Zealand Actors' Equity industrial organiser Frances Walsh who said the move was nothing but good news for the country.

That purpose to remove consideration of employment law under the Employment Relations Act 2000, exclusively for the film production industry, has been soundly debated and has generated enormous interest both here and across the globe.

And we should be under no illusion that when Executives from New Line Cinema and Warner Brothers flew into New Zealand earlier this week that they had already received approaches from other countries offering lucrative inducements for them to abandon New Zealand in their favour.

That is the nature of the international market in which this Bill operates.

I would have to say that from the outset the intense heat generated by the debate – and the extent of the international interest – was not something that any of us anticipated.

Advertisement - scroll to continue reading





In the entertainment industry world, the New Zealand fight for the Hobbit even made headlines in the prestigious magazine Variety. That source claimed that “the recent actors' boycott highlights the country's fragile relationship with Hollywood”.

And in the New York Times the paper fronted with the question \"Is Wellywood burning?"

Of course the adverse impact of global headlines like this should not be underestimated.

But how does it matter on the ground in Murihiku or Murupara; what will it matter to Maori?

That might be a good question to ask of one of our leading Maori innovators, Ian Taylor – of Taylormade Productions and ARL – Animation Research Ltd.

Kahungunu man, Ian Taylor has advanced some landmark graphic developments, including the award winning Moka Toa series, and from home – the Whalewatch Kaikoura World of the Whales animated virtual tours.

But where the world has also sat us is through the influence of his company, Virtual Spectator, which brought the America’s Cup into homes around the world by the use of real-time tracking of races – and his skilful manipulation of the software.

During his contribution to the debate, my colleague Te Ururoa Flavell also talked about the impact this deal will have for many Maori engaged in film production work as actors, stunt performers extras, singers, musicians, dancers, entertainers and more.

We do believe that those working in the film industry are closer to self-employed contractors than employees. And as such, this legislation clarifies the situation.

We cannot deny that the multi-million dollar package negotiated this week lays the foundation for creating thousands of jobs as well as tourism opportunities and international exposure.

It is simply too good an opportunity to miss. New Zealand has secured one of the world premieres of the movies, and we have an agreement from Sir Peter Jackson that part of the arrangement will ensure material promoting this country as a tourism destination to be included in all DVDs and digital products for The Hobbit, at conservative estimates expected to reach an international audience of tens of millions.  
And we simply have to appreciate the tangible difference this will make in the lives of so many New Zealanders.

If the Hobbit had gone offshore, the local movie industry would have been seriously threatened – and with that the many industries associated with this work.

We simply can’t afford that.

But throughout all of this ordeal, we must continue to remain concerned that minimum terms and conditions are employed for anyone working on these movies – or indeed in any future movies.

There must be protection for workers; and we must be able to hold our heads up high not only for the quality of the work onscreen, but also for the quality of the relationships built in producing the final outcome.

We must be on high alert to prevent unscrupulous treatment of workers or conditions which might serve to erode the integrity of our reputation.

The Maori Party is proud to support this Bill.

ENDS

[© Scoop Media](http://www.scoop.co.nz/about/terms.html)  

Advertisement - scroll to continue reading



a.supporter:hover {background:#EC4438!important;} @media screen and (max-width: 480px) { #byline-block div.byline-block {padding-right:16px;}}

### Using Scoop for work?

Scoop is free for personal use, but you’ll need a licence for work use. This is part of our Ethical Paywall and how we fund Scoop. Join today with plans starting from less than $3 per week, plus gain access to exclusive _Pro_ features.  
  
[Join Pro Individual](https://pro.scoop.co.nz/Individual/?from=ProIn24) [Find out more](https://pro.scoop.co.nz/using-scoop-for-work/?from=ProIn24)

Find more from [The Maori Party](https://info.scoop.co.nz/The_Maori_Party) on InfoPages.