---
title: "Universities starved in Budget"
slug: universities-starved-in-budget
date: 2004-05-27
source: https://www.scoop.co.nz/stories/ED0405/S00105/universities-starved-in-budget.htm
source-name: Scoop
author: Association of University Staff
author-slug: association-of-university-staff
---

<p><img align="left" width="85" height="85" src="http://www.aus.ac.nz/pictures/logo.gif" alt="AUS WEB SITE" border="0">Universities starved in
Budget<br>Universities have been a big loser in today’s
Budget, according to the Association of University Staff
(AUS). Universities will receive a funding increase of 3.2%
per student in 2005, only 0.9% more than inflation, and
nothing additional for research.<br>They will receive the
lowest overall funding increase across the whole of the
education sector.<br>AUS National President Dr Bill
Rosenberg said that as a result of the Budget, government
funding per student in 2005 would be substantially less, in
actual terms, than it was fifteen years ago. For example, an
arts degree attracted government funding of $7,505 per
student in 1991, but will only attract only $6,049 per
student in 2005.<br>Dr Rosenberg said that recent research,
commissioned by the AUS and the New Zealand
Vice-Chancellors’ Committee, revealed that government
funding of universities had fallen in real terms by 23% over
the last decade. <br>“Today’s Budget does nothing to
alleviate the funding crisis which has become apparent in
the university sector,” said Dr Rosenberg. “Spending on
tertiary funding in New Zealand remains lower than the OECD
average, and universities have fared worst within the
sector.”<br>Dr Rosenberg said that the failure to
substantially increase research funding was particularly
disappointing. “After the efforts to establish the
Performance-Based Research Fund, we had expected the
Government to show that it had a real commitment to the
future of research. Clearly it has not,” he said.<br> “This
Budget undermines the long-term quality of university
education and inhibits the enhancement of an economy and
society based on increased knowledge,” said Dr Rosenberg.
<br>An Innovation Conference for tertiary education
institutions, also announced in today’s Budget, would do
nothing to address the basic funding of salaries, staffing
levels, and infrastructure according to Dr Rosenberg. “It is
nothing but an effort to draw attention from the fundamental
issues facing the sector,” he said. <br>Dr Rosenberg said it
was time the Government differentiated its policy on
universities and funded them in a manner which enabled them
meet their specific role as it has begun to do for community
childcare centers and public polytechnics in the Budget.<p>
<p>Ends</p>

<p>For further information please contact</p>

<p>Dr Bill
Rosenberg					<br>National President, AUS				<br>Phone	(03)
364 2801 (work)				<br>(03) 332 8525 (home)	 					<br>021
680 475 (mobile) 						<br>Email
	bill.rosenberg@canterbury.ac.nz<p>

<p>Helen Kelly, <br>General
Secretary, Association of University Staff (AUS)		<br>Phone
	(04) 915 6691 (work)	<br>(04) 385 3153 (home)		<br>027 436
6308 (mobile) 	<br>Email:  helen.kelly@aus.ac.nz</p>

<p><br>The
Association of University Staff<br>PO Box 11 767 Wellington,
New Zealand<br>Phone +64 4 915 6690        Fax +64 4 915
6699        Email:
national.office@aus.ac.nz</p>






<!--


