---
slug: maxim-institute-real-issues-no-247
title: "Maxim Institute - real issues - No 247"
date: 2007-04-05
source-url: https://www.scoop.co.nz/stories/PO0704/S00101/maxim-institute-real-issues-no-247.htm
author: maxim-institute
---
Maxim Institute - real issues - No 247
======================================

**Thursday, 5 April 2007, 4:56 pm**  
**Press Release: [Maxim Institute](https://info.scoop.co.nz/Maxim_Institute)**

Maxim Institute - real issues - No 247

Maxim Institute - real issues - No 247  
5 April 2007  
www.maxim.org.nz

Strengthening the thin blue line  
National standards: passing the test  
How to grow strong communities

IN THE NEWS

More couples staying married  
New Zealand “miserly” on aid

STRENGTHENING THE THIN BLUE LINE

The report of the three year Commission of Inquiry into Police Conduct  
released to Parliament this week has raised major questions about what we  
expect of our Police and about how well those expectations are being  
communicated.

The Report of the Commission of Inquiry into Police Conduct examines police  
practices, conduct and internal investigations between 1979 and 2005, and  
makes 60 recommendations for the New Zealand Police. Overall, the  
Commission praised the New Zealand Police for good practices, commending  
the vast majority of hard-working Kiwi cops. It also recognised, however,  
that a higher moral standard is expected of those holding positions of  
authority in our community, and so saw an overwhelming need for the  
creation of standards and policies regarding the conduct of officers,  
particularly their sexual conduct.

Dame Margaret Bazley, who headed the Inquiry, said that although there was  
evidence of some 'disgraceful conduct' during the period investigated, many  
of these incidents took place during the 1980s, and since then initiatives  
have been taken by Police management to address these areas. Despite this,  
the Commission recommends the creation of a single, accessible code of  
conduct for officers, especially in relation to appropriate sexual  
practices. It is disappointing that such a document is needed to ensure  
that Police officers are aware of what the community considers appropriate  
sexual conduct. Whether officers choose to do right and adhere to the code  
will impact on the public's level of confidence in the Police and trust in  
their authority.

Advertisement - scroll to continue reading





The report indicates an expectation within our community that, as holders  
of power and authority, the Police are held to a higher standard of moral  
conduct, whether on duty or off. There is no one document, however, that  
the Police can refer to for guidance in this area. In many ways, it is a  
sign of our post-modern society that such a document is needed; in a  
culture where personal morals are seen as fluid and subjective, such a  
solid and directive code of conduct imposes from outside what has failed to  
be formed internally: allegiance to the common moral ethic, and a culture  
of self-control.

Read the Report of the Commission of Inquiry into Police Conduct  

Write to the editor  

NATIONAL STANDARDS: PASSING THE TEST

John Key turned up the heat on education standards this week, issuing a  
challenge to Prime Minister Helen Clark to say how many kids left primary  
school last year without reaching the minimum expected standard in reading,  
writing and maths, and calling for national standards in literacy and  
numeracy.

This challenge was hot on the heels of a report from the Education Review  
Office (ERO) on the collection and use of assessment information in  
schools, which found only 44 percent of schools were 'effectively  
establishing and using school-wide information to improve student  
achievement.' The statements highlight the absence of a national report on  
pupil progress in New Zealand. Every pupil in every school should be  
assessed against national standards to monitor their progress and to  
understand the value added by the teacher or the school to their learning.  
There is some information available, but the education system could do a  
lot better.

The government and the Ministry of Education have deliberately shunned the  
introduction of national standards - and assessments referenced to them -  
out of an irrational fear that the information will lead to parents  
comparing schools. While teachers need assessments that help them to find  
out what pupils can and cannot do, there is also a need for assessments  
that can monitor precisely how pupils are progressing towards expected  
standards—like learning to read.

One of the various national tests which schools may use in the classroom,  
asTTle (Assessment Tools for Teaching and Learning), touched on by Mr Key,  
has the potential to be developed into a national report on pupil progress.  
Since asTTle tests are calibrated to both national norms for sub-groups of  
the population and achievement standards within curriculum levels, pupils'  
results can be compared against a common understanding of achievement, and  
teachers alerted if there is cause for concern. This sort of monitoring is  
what parents expect, and they should have it.

The problem is that asTTle remains voluntary because of the educrats' fear  
of comparison. Mr Key has missed the opportunity to require every school to  
employ asTTle. Using asTTle would mean teachers would have a national  
'test' that could help them in the classroom and provide a comprehensive  
national report on pupil progress, without having to introduce an elaborate  
national exam to test whether pupils have achieved national standards.  
Pupils, parents and teachers would all benefit.

Read Maxim Institute's media release on this issue  

Write to the editor  

HOW TO GROW STRONG COMMUNITIES

At the Maxim Institute 2007 Forum last Friday, Professor Peter Saunders,  
from the Centre for Independent Studies in Australia, gave an address on  
The power of community and the limits of government. His talk really cut to  
the heart of the central challenge posed by social justice - how do we  
build strong communities? The key ideas of his talk are summarised below.

Sociologist Ferdinand Toennies, said, 'The sentiments and motives which  
draw people to each other, keep them together, and induce them to joint  
action'. People tend to be drawn together through family relations, shared  
geographic location, shared beliefs, or conversely, through self-interest  
in matters such as trade. Clearly these factors are all important things  
which strengthen communities. In pursuing social justice we have too often  
turned to the government, expecting it to create social cohesion by  
redistributing wealth when, in fact, increased interference by government  
can have unintended consequences - even producing a weaker and more  
disconnected society.

When we look to government to be chiefly responsible for bringing about  
social justice, we disempower individuals by removing the need for personal  
responsibility. We instead entrench dependency. We politicise civil society  
when government removes the need for communities to help people;  
consequently, civil society ends up simply lobbying the government for  
money, rather than tackling the problem itself. In doing this we also crowd  
out the 'little platoons', the organic institutions and allegiances of the  
community which are capable of meeting needs.

Government is not a neutral force; when it acts, it either acts for good or  
for evil and sometimes the consequences of legislation will not be seen for  
a long time. There is some evidence to suggest that in New Zealand,  
increased government spending and initiatives have not built the social  
cohesion they aimed at.

Sociologist Robert Nisbet's insight and response to Toennies is instructive  
for all seeking social justice: People will not come together in small,  
cohesive social groups unless they share some practical reason for doing  
so, when they recognise some common purpose that must be realised through  
cooperating with each other. The more the State does for people, the less  
they need to do for themselves and the fewer reasons there will be for them  
to associate together, and to work together, for the common good.

Listen to an interview with Peter Saunders and NewstalkZB's Leighton Smith  
(Available until 6/4/2007, Timecode: 11:00)  

Read an overview of the Maxim Institute Forum 2007 by John Fox  

Write to the editor  

IN THE NEWS

MORE COUPLES STAYING MARRIED

More couples in New Zealand are remaining married, an incline which has  
been linked to the current strong economy. New data has been released this  
week by the Ministry of Social Development at the Social Policy Research  
and Evaluation Conference 2007. These new figures show there has been a  
slight increase in married couples staying together; 72 percent of couples  
remained together as shown in the 2006 census, up one percent from 2001.

The data shows that the largest increase in couples staying together is  
found in those couples with children under the age of three. Moira Wilson,  
analyst from the Ministry of Social Development, said that the data points  
to the likelihood of a higher success rate in marriages for this younger  
generation than the previous generation, which suffered through a tougher  
financial period. Given the importance of marriage for children and society  
at large, such figures are an encouraging sign.

Visit the Social Policy Research and Evaluation Conference 2007 website  

NEW ZEALAND 'MISERLY' ON AID

A new OECD report shows that New Zealand's level of overseas development  
aid remains at 0.27 percent of the Gross National Income (GNI), unchanged  
from 2005. This level of foreign aid ranks New Zealand in the bottom six  
OECD countries for aid levels, along with Japan, Portugal, Italy, the  
United States and Greece. OXFAM New Zealand labelled the figure 'miserly',  
and United Future Leader Peter Dunne called for New Zealand to increase the  
amount to 0.7 percent 'over the next few years'.

Read the OCED report on development aid  

TALKING POINT

'No social group will long survive the disappearance of its chief reasons  
for being'

Robert Nisbet, The Quest for Community, 1953

A registered charitable trust, funded by donations, Maxim Institute values  
your interest and support.

Click here to find out how you can support Maxim Institute  

Maxim Institute's regular email publication, Real Issues, provides  
thought-provoking analysis of developments in policy and culture in New  
Zealand and around the world. You can express you views on any of the  
articles featured in Real Issues by writing a letter to the editor. A  
selection of the best letters will be posted each week on Maxim Institute's  
website .

ends

[© Scoop Media](http://www.scoop.co.nz/about/terms.html)  

Advertisement - scroll to continue reading



a.supporter:hover {background:#EC4438!important;} @media screen and (max-width: 480px) { #byline-block div.byline-block {padding-right:16px;}}

### Using Scoop for work?

Scoop is free for personal use, but you’ll need a licence for work use. This is part of our Ethical Paywall and how we fund Scoop. Join today with plans starting from less than $3 per week, plus gain access to exclusive _Pro_ features.  
  
[Join Pro Individual](https://pro.scoop.co.nz/Individual/?from=ProIn24) [Find out more](https://pro.scoop.co.nz/using-scoop-for-work/?from=ProIn24)

Find more from [Maxim Institute](https://info.scoop.co.nz/Maxim_Institute) on InfoPages.