---
slug: maxim-report-terrorism-australia-children
title: "Maxim Report: Terrorism, Australia, Children"
date: 2007-10-19
source-url: https://www.scoop.co.nz/stories/PO0710/S00285/maxim-report-terrorism-australia-children.htm
author: maxim-institute
---
Maxim Report: Terrorism, Australia, Children
============================================

**Friday, 19 October 2007, 10:17 am**  
**Press Release: [Maxim Institute](https://info.scoop.co.nz/Maxim_Institute)**

Real Issues No. 275 - Terrorism, Australia, Children  
Maxim Institute - real issues - No. 275  
18 October 2007  
www.maxim.org.nz

Terror's threat  
Howard's way for Australia?  
Worryingly anxious children

IN THE NEWS  
NCEA put to the test  
Law Commission's

TERROR'S THREAT

The arrest of seventeen people in police raids on alleged 'training camps'  
has caused a media storm involving 'activists,' 'weapons training camps,'  
'napalm,' 'firearms charges,' the Terrorism Suppression Act and general  
muddle, as we all try to work out what exactly the facts are, and what on  
earth is going on in the depths of the bush.

Whether or not the 'activists' in this particular case were a real threat,  
over-enthusiastic survivalists, or harmless youth workers doing their  
knitting, the threat could all too easily be real. It seems a good time to  
think again about the roots and bulwarks of the common good, to remember  
those things which hold us together in the midst of threat, danger and  
disagreement.

Human society is made up of people held together by social glue, and by  
commonly accepted rules about how we will live together. Most obviously  
these rules are contained in the rule of law to which we all ought to  
submit, but also in other voices whose authority we recognise. In a healthy  
society, we allow and encourage standing grounds for disagreement and  
dissent: trade unions, lobby groups, churches, associations and even  
families, can serve as places from which to uphold values, speak our piece,  
and talk to the wider society about what is on our mind. This is how a  
healthy democracy works; it allows safety valves for the expression of  
dissent and frustration, and for a process of public dialogue and moral  
persuasion on the basis of a commonly understood social ethic.

Advertisement - scroll to continue reading





It is this understanding of freedom, order and democratic government which  
is attacked by the threat of terror. Abandoning the way we do things, and  
the accepted ways of expressing legitimate dissent in favour of violence is  
thus not only a threat to freedom, but to the very existence of ordered  
society itself. Whether or not there was a real threat this time, we are  
reminded that the safety and security of our whole society depends not only  
on the Police, but also on the rest of us. We must work together to build  
and to foster a healthy body politic, with the strong social bonds we  
cannot afford to neglect.

HOWARD'S WAY FOR AUSTRALIA?

John Howard has at last announced that the Australian federal election will  
be on 24 November. On this day, Australians must decide whether to return  
Howard's Coalition Government to office. Howard, who has been Prime  
Minister since 1996, faces opposition from a resurgent Australian Labor  
Party (ALP), and its leader, Kevin Rudd, promises to bring 'new leadership'  
to Australia. The closer Australia gets to the election, the more that the  
age-old philosophical divide between the two main parties emerges, with one  
party offering hands-on 'national leadership' and the other more  
flexibility and freedom to the people.

Kevin Rudd's response to the announcement of the election was to claim that  
the current Government was out of touch on issues like climate change,  
healthcare and labour laws which allow employers to negotiate more flexible  
contracts with workers. He is pledging that under him the federal  
government would expand its role, with various national strategies and  
programmes. Howard, by contrast, proposes to lead the country in a way  
which gives incentives for people to work and prosper while also promising  
leadership that will foster the national good. Howard, and Treasurer Peter  
Costello, have announced a wide-ranging set of tax cuts, which would  
deliver around A$20 (NZ$24) per week to a person on average earnings from 1  
July 2008.

While the ALP is ahead in the polls by as much as eighteen points, Howard  
has history on his side. Even Rudd has conceded that to win this election  
means his party will 'have to make history.' The ALP has only won twice  
from opposition since World War II and it is generally unusual for  
incumbent governments to lose when the economy is in good shape, although  
sometimes voters simply tire of a government.

In New Zealand, with debate revived during the last month about the role of  
government in delivering public services such as education and healthcare,  
the differences are also becoming more apparent between the National Party,  
aspiring to become the Government, and the incumbent Labour-led Government.  
For voters in both countries the sharper differentiation shows precisely  
the presuppositions which lie behind the rhetoric of each party: either a  
stronger hand for government, with either Labour Party, but perhaps at the  
expense of the freedom to prosper on one's own terms, which is being  
offered by the Coalition and the National Party. But in Australia-no matter  
how one looks at it-both Howard and Rudd will need to work hard to convince  
voters that theirs is the best way forward.

WORRYINGLY ANXIOUS CHILDREN

A report released this week in the UK highlights some alarming trends in  
schools and communities. Community Soundings, a report from the Primary  
Review, has found a consensus across various communities and schools that  
children's behaviour, their anxiety about the future and parents' lack of  
responsibility for their children need attention.

The Primary Review is a broad project, based at the University of  
Cambridge, established to consider primary education and related social  
factors. It aims to assess various factors within primary schools,  
including education and curriculum, culture, society and the global  
context, values and principles, parenting and children's lives outside of  
school. Community Soundings is the first part of this review. The  
information contained in the report comes from interviews in nine different  
regions of England, with a total of 757 people, including parents,  
teachers, local authorities, police, heads of schools and primary-aged  
children.

According to the report, children are struggling to adapt to a changing  
culture, and have a high degree of anxiety about social factors such as  
gangs, weapons and street violence, and international events such as  
climate change and global inequality. They also fear for their personal  
safety outside of school. The teachers interviewed were concerned about the  
pervasive and often inappropriate influence of media and technology on  
children and increasing marital breakdown and family instability. Teachers  
and community representatives were also concerned about parents failing to  
teach basic principles of good behaviour or mutual respect for others. Many  
teachers also felt children were growing up socially isolated, both within  
their families and across generations.

With increasing social disconnection it is hardly surprising that children  
are feeling fearful and isolated. The increasing importance of television  
must contribute to this directly by communicating to children a picture of  
threats in the world and indirectly by its presence as a substitute for  
family relationships. Parents need to consider their levels of involvement  
with their children, alongside the impact of letting children have  
unfettered use of technology. The anxiety children feel about the world  
around them should remind us that we are responsible for the way our  
society develops. While it would be easy to become pessimistic about the  
report's findings, the best response is to learn from them and act early.

Read Community Soundings  
http://www.primaryreview.org.uk/Downloads/Int\_Reps/1.Com\_Sdg/Primary\_Review\_Community\_Soundings\_report\_final.pdf

  
IN THE NEWS

NCEA PUT TO THE TEST

The New Zealand Council for Education Research released a report yesterday,  
showing that while 89 percent of school principals and 60 percent of  
teachers support NCEA, there are 'high levels of uncertainty among  
parents.' Taking the pulse of NCEA, which analyses data gathered in late  
2006, suggests that parents and teachers who are unhappy with NCEA are more  
likely to be unhappy with other aspects of the school as well, such as a  
lack of support for a teacher, or insufficient communication between a  
parent and the school. Rosemary Hipkins, author of the report, suggests  
that NCEA is being used as a 'lightning rod' for a broader dissatisfaction  
about secondary school education, and in fact there was 'very little  
desire' amongst those interviewed to return to the previous education  
system.

Read Taking the pulse of NCEA  
http://www.nzcer.org.nz/pdfs/15782.pdf

LAW COMMISSION'S NEW WORK PROGRAMME

The Law Commission has released its work programme for next year. As well  
as completing existing work, the Commission will begin new projects,  
including reviews of the Misuse of Drugs Act, the assault provisions of the  
Crimes Act and 'the law relating to private schools.' The Commission will  
also look at reforms to criminal procedure and 'reducing the level and  
impact of organised crime in New Zealand.'

The Law Commission is an independent body 'which reviews areas of the law  
that need updating, reforming or developing,' and makes recommendations to  
Parliament. In the process, it provides opportunities for interested people  
to make submissions on its work. The Commission deals with important issues  
that affect many New Zealanders. Members of the public should take  
advantage of opportunities to make submissions when they arise.

Find out more about the Law Commission, its projects and opportunities to  
make submissions  
http://www.lawcom.govt.nz

TALKING POINT

'Order without liberty and liberty without order are equally destructive.'

Theodore Roosevelt

A registered charitable trust, funded by donations, Maxim Institute values  
your interest and support.

Click here to find out how you can support Maxim Institute  

Maxim Institute's regular email publication, Real Issues, provides  
thought-provoking analysis of developments in policy and culture in New  
Zealand and around the world. You can express you views on any of the  
articles featured in Real Issues by writing a letter to the editor. A  
selection of the best letters will be posted each week on Maxim Institute's  
website .

ends

[© Scoop Media](http://www.scoop.co.nz/about/terms.html)  

Advertisement - scroll to continue reading



a.supporter:hover {background:#EC4438!important;} @media screen and (max-width: 480px) { #byline-block div.byline-block {padding-right:16px;}}

### Using Scoop for work?

Scoop is free for personal use, but you’ll need a licence for work use. This is part of our Ethical Paywall and how we fund Scoop. Join today with plans starting from less than $3 per week, plus gain access to exclusive _Pro_ features.  
  
[Join Pro Individual](https://pro.scoop.co.nz/Individual/?from=ProIn24) [Find out more](https://pro.scoop.co.nz/using-scoop-for-work/?from=ProIn24)

Find more from [Maxim Institute](https://info.scoop.co.nz/Maxim_Institute) on InfoPages.