---
slug: real-issues-no-320-law-art-parental-leave
title: "Real Issues No. 320 - Law, Art, Parental Leave"
date: 2008-09-26
source-url: https://www.scoop.co.nz/stories/PO0809/S00387/real-issues-no-320-law-art-parental-leave.htm
author: maxim-institute
---
Real Issues No. 320 - Law, Art, Parental Leave
==============================================

**Friday, 26 September 2008, 11:10 am**  
**Press Release: [Maxim Institute](https://info.scoop.co.nz/Maxim_Institute)**

Real Issues No. 320 - Law, Art, Parental Leave  
Maxim Institute - real issues - No. 320  
25 September 2008  
www.maxim.org.nz

A divisive tribunal  
'the plainest part of it'  
Pay your own parental leave?

IN THE NEWS  
Schools Plus  
Have your say on fathering  
Maxim Institute Nine Month Internship -- apply now

A DIVISIVE TRIBUNAL

The introduction of a parallel system of justice is a recurring topic of  
concern in the UK, as debates continue between those in favour and those  
adamantly against the introduction of Islam's Sharia law into the British  
legal system. It has recently been revealed, however, that to a small  
extent this already exists, in the form of the Muslim Arbitration Tribunal  
(MAT): a tribunal that allows Muslims to have their disputes heard in a  
setting which takes into consideration both British and Sharia law.

The MAT was set up in 2007 under the provisions of the Arbitration Act  
1996, which allows the Tribunal to mediate and arbitrate on issues brought  
before it by those seeking resolution under Islamic law. By working within  
the framework of British law, any decisions made by the Tribunal can later  
be enforced by the ordinary courts. As explained by MAT itself, the  
Tribunal will, 'for the first time, offer the Muslim community a real and  
true opportunity to settle disputes in accordance with Islamic Sacred Law  
with the knowledge that the outcome as determined by MAT will be binding  
and enforceable.'

Advertisement - scroll to continue reading





MAT deals mostly with disputes within the range of family, commercial and  
inheritance law, and disputes between mosques: it does not have  
jurisdiction to try criminal matters, although it will mediate on criminal  
cases that fall within these other areas -- such as domestic violence. This  
in particular has raised serious concerns in Britain as there are fears  
that Islamic law treats women differently to men.

The Tribunal raises a number of important and difficult questions. Unlike  
British law which sets up basic parameters, Sharia law is a personal law,  
covering all the mundane, day-to-day aspects of a Muslim's life. Further,  
it has different concepts of justice, unequal views of men and women, and  
demands harsh punishment of anyone who wishes to be removed from its  
authority. Moreover, one issue of particular difficulty is the Rule of Law,  
which is undermined by a parallel system of justice. The Rule of Law states  
that all people are equal under the law, and that the same law should apply  
to all -- a concept that underpins the function of democracy. The parallel  
legal system that the MAT effectively establishes not only divides a  
society, but creates much confusion for the process of justice.

Find out more about the Muslim Arbitration Tribunal  
http://www.matribunal.com/

'THE PLAINEST PART OF IT'

Next time you have a headache it might be worth taking a trip to the art  
gallery. You have heard of art for art's sake, well how about art for  
ache's sake. Research has emerged from the University of Bari in Italy  
showing a connection between pain relief and beautiful art. The study by Dr  
Marina de Tommaso looked at the link between people's responses to pain and  
their contemplation of art. When people were looking at art they found  
beautiful, they experienced substantially less pain than when the same  
painful stimuli was given to them while looking at art they found ugly. The  
research demonstrates a clear connection between aesthetic beauty and pain  
relief, reminding us that the human being is complex and interconnected,  
that there is mystery to the way we work and that beauty has an intrinsic  
place in human existence.

This research builds on what has been known for a long time. Diversional  
therapy is a field that is dedicated solely to the notion that distracting  
a person's attention away from their pain or anxieties makes life more  
pleasant. However this study goes further by showing that beauty is not  
merely a distraction, rather it changes the level of pain a person actually  
experiences. This has implications for the way patients suffering pain are  
treated. Whilst medication can be useful in treating pain, it may also be  
helpful for aesthetics and beauty to be incorporated into the way that  
hospitals are built and patients are treated. It also has more general  
implications for the way life is understood, beckoning us towards an  
understanding of health as intrinsically connected to what is often termed  
our 'quality of life.' It seems that health is about more than just  
survival, it is shaped by the environments that a person is a part of and  
the beauty that they do or do not see around them.

In the world of medicine, where science struggles to find ways to preserve  
human life and minimise discomfort, there is a tendency to reduce human  
life to its mechanisms -- a beating heart, a well -- working joint or  
muscle. The link between aesthetics and pain reminds us that people cannot  
be reduced to a collection of functions, or lifted from the environments in  
which they live. As G. K. Chesterton once wrote 'The mystery of life is the  
plainest part of it.'

PAY YOUR OWN PARENTAL LEAVE?

The dilemma of balancing work and family life has taken centre stage  
recently, with the topic of paid parental leave often at the forefront of  
the debate. Into this context, the Centre for Independent Studies in  
Australia has offered a policy paper proposing alternatives to state or  
employer funded schemes. The paper suggests that self-funded parental  
leave, provided through workers' savings, or a state-organised loan scheme,  
is a fairer and better way for parents to take time off work to be at home  
with their children.

The proposal involves the retention of the current short-term scheme in  
Australia, which provides for fourteen weeks' state funded parental leave,  
but proposes an additional provision for personal savings and loans that  
would enable parents to stay at home with their children for extended  
periods. The savings scheme they propose would be flexible, allowing  
families to draw down savings for home deposits or retirement, as well as  
maternity or paternity leave. It would also be supported by tax breaks. A  
loan system is the second option put forward, whereby income-contingent  
loans would be granted to families able to show they could pay them back.

The scheme is attractive due to the balance it strikes between public and  
private interests. Another substantial benefit is its encouragement of  
personal responsibility. It realises both the public and private interests  
vested in encouraging parents to be at home with their children in the  
early critical stages of development. However, despite the attractions of  
such a scheme, with New Zealand wages relatively low and fairly high tax  
rates, many families here would struggle to opt into it.

Read Baby steps toward self-funded parental leave  
http://www.cis.org.au/issue\_analysis/IA100/ia100.pdf

IN THE NEWS

SCHOOLS PLUS

The Government has announced an initial investment of $39.4 million over  
the next four years to further develop and implement the Schools Plus  
programme. The Schools Plus proposal aims to introduce a system of  
appropriate after-school training, career education and youth  
apprenticeship schemes, so that by 2014 all young people up until the age  
of eighteen will be in some form of education or training. The system is  
intended to help address the current problem of low educational achievement  
and low levels of literacy and numeracy from young school leavers and has  
several valuable aspects. However, the compulsory nature of the proposal is  
a drawback, as it restricts schools from having the flexibility or freedom  
to develop individual plans to meet the needs of students who may not be  
suited to remaining in education for so long.

Read Investing in young people to boost achievement  
http://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/investing+young+people+boost+achievement

Read Maxim Institute's submission on Schools Plus  
http://www.maxim.org.nz/files/pdf/submission\_schools\_plus.pdf

HAVE YOUR SAY ON FATHERING

The Families Commission is currently undertaking research into a range of  
family issues including how best they can assist men to be better fathers.  
To this end they have set up a website that operates as an 'online panel'  
to find out what the public think. At the moment men are under-represented  
on this site and as a result the Families Commission is looking for more  
men to come forward and provide their feedback on fathering. This is a  
great opportunity to have your say in a forum which could be influential in  
forming responses to a variety of family issues.

Visit The Couch website to have your say  
http://www.thecouch.org.nz/member/home/

MAXIM INSTITUTE NINE MONTH INTERNSHIP -- APPLY NOW

Do you like to think? Are you interested in the deeper issues of society?  
Do you care about the world around you? If your answer to these questions  
is yes and you have completed the end of your studies or have been working  
for a couple of years in the workforce, then the Maxim Institute Nine Month  
Internship could be for you. The curriculum covers a range of topics  
including jurisprudence, politics, theology, economic policy and  
philosophy. Interns also gain professional experience working directly with  
the Institute's research, policy, communications and events departments.  
The internship runs from March 2008 through to November 2008, with  
applications being accepted from now until 1 December 2008.

For more information please contact Maxim Institute's Internships Manager,  
Rachel Langton  
http://www.maxim.org.nz/index.cfm/About\_us/Send\_Email?id=34

TALKING POINT

'What art offers is space -- a certain breathing room for the spirit.'

John Updike

A registered charitable trust, funded by donations, Maxim Institute values  
your interest and support.

Click here to find out how you can support Maxim Institute  
(http://www.maxim.org.nz/index.cfm/About\_us/Support\_us)

Maxim Institute's regular email publication, Real Issues, provides  
thought-provoking analysis of developments in policy and culture in New  
Zealand and around the world.

ends

  

[© Scoop Media](http://www.scoop.co.nz/about/terms.html)  

Advertisement - scroll to continue reading



a.supporter:hover {background:#EC4438!important;} @media screen and (max-width: 480px) { #byline-block div.byline-block {padding-right:16px;}}

### Using Scoop for work?

Scoop is free for personal use, but you’ll need a licence for work use. This is part of our Ethical Paywall and how we fund Scoop. Join today with plans starting from less than $3 per week, plus gain access to exclusive _Pro_ features.  
  
[Join Pro Individual](https://pro.scoop.co.nz/Individual/?from=ProIn24) [Find out more](https://pro.scoop.co.nz/using-scoop-for-work/?from=ProIn24)

Find more from [Maxim Institute](https://info.scoop.co.nz/Maxim_Institute) on InfoPages.