---
slug: news-worthy-10-june-2005
title: "News Worthy, 10 June 2005"
date: 2005-06-10
source-url: https://www.scoop.co.nz/stories/PA0506/S00209/news-worthy-10-june-2005.htm
author: new-zealand-national-party
---
News Worthy, 10 June 2005
=========================

**Friday, 10 June 2005, 11:13 am**  
**Press Release: [New Zealand National Party](https://info.scoop.co.nz/New_Zealand_National_Party)**

News Worthy

10 June 2005  
No. 31

The leaky homes saga

This is the third occasion on which I have referred to this event. As the days go by we get more information as to the scale of the problem.

The numbers are staggering:  
· $5 billion - upper limits of estimated cost of repairing leaky homes  
· 40,000 - estimated number of homes affected  
· 100 - average number of new claims to the Weathertight Homes Resolution Service each month  
· 12 - average number of cases resolved by the service each month  
· $4.5 million – amount budgeted by the Government to fight liability claims this year  
· $53.3 million – administration budget for the service until 2009

The Government seems paralysed and seemingly unable to deal with the issue. Here are two suggestions:

· a bonding system for builders should be considered to deal with the problem that some developers set up single-purpose companies which they then collapse when the building project is completed.  
· the Government could provide interest-free loans to those owners unable to meet the costs of remedial work . There would need to be some conditions attached to those loans – for example that the money advanced was actually spent on the remedial work.

MMP – why party votes matter

In 2000, 95 per cent of the party votes influenced the composition of Parliament. If National gets 40 per cent of the party vote and no electorates, we get 48 seats in Parliament; if National gets 40 per cent of the party vote and 20 electorates, we still get 48 seats. That is why the party vote is so important.

Advertisement - scroll to continue reading





Join National today

If you would like to join the National Party we would welcome you. The link to join is https://secure.enlightenhosting.com/national/support.aspx

Statement from Transtasman newsletter  
(2 June 2005 -reprinted without comment)

Hide’s Dose of Rejection Sickness

Rodney Hide is suffering rejection sickness. ACT polling puts his personal electorate rating with Epsom voters at about 8%. His demeanour may sour further if National goes ahead with plans for a billboard to read “A vote for ACT is a vote for Labour”

National’s reasoning is if ACT doesn’t make the 5% threshold for list Parliamentary representation the votes will be reassigned with Labour a significant beneficiary.

Australian versus New Zealand pay rates

Figures from Statistics NZ and the Australian Bureau of Statistics show that wage growth in Australia has easily outstripped New Zealand’s.

In the last five years to last November, Australians’ average weekly earnings rose 27.5% from A$801.60 to A$1,021.90.

In New Zealand, average weekly incomes for the five years to last June went up 22.3% from $619 to $757.

National Party policy

National is campaigning on five policy issues - law and order, welfare dependency, the resolution of Treaty issues, choice and excellence in education and narrowing the gap between our living standards and those in Australia. All of the policies have been carefully costed.

National will ensure that all New Zealanders, regardless of race, are equal before the law by:  
· accelerating the resolution of historical Treaty grievances, requiring all claims to be lodged by the end of 2006 and resolved by the end of 2010  
· abolishing separate Maori electorates, and race-based representation in local government, District Health Boards, Primary Health Organisations, and other public bodies  
· dealing with all New Zealanders on the basis of need, and not providing more funds to some New Zealanders than to others simply on the basis of race, whether in healthcare, education, or social welfare  
· removing references to “the principles of the Treaty”, and other inappropriate or divisive references to the Treaty, from legislation and departmental publications  
· legislating to ensure that the seabed and foreshore remain unambiguously in Crown ownership except where specific fee simple title exists  
· supporting choice and diversity in the provision of education, healthcare and social services, and enabling all New Zealanders to develop and choose services appropriate to their needs  
· recognising and supporting the Maori language, given its uniqueness to New Zealand and its special place in New Zealand culture

Political Quote of the Week  
"I must remind the right honourable gentleman that a monologue is not a decision."- Clement Atlee, British Prime Minister, to Winston Churchill

ENDS

Upcoming Events

10 June  
70th anniversary of Alcoholics Anonymous

Auckland Disability Provider Network political forum

Kings College Old Collegian Annual Reunion

11 June  
Taiwanese Hwa Hsia - Year 2005 Dragon Boat Festival celebrations

Kings vs Grammar Annual rugby match

Lions vs NZ Maori - Hamilton

Don Brash dinner at SkyCity

Lions Club of Auckland Chinese Change of Officers and Induction ceremony

14 June  
Launch of Auckland Regional Exit Breath Survey 2005

Richard participating in Wellington District Law Society Justice spokespeople forum

15 June  
Lions vs Wellington - Wellington

Christian Life Centre Auckland Book Launch of "Marriage Works" at Parliament

13 June  
Richard addressing Port Waikato electorate meeting

14 June  
Richard participating in Wellington District Law Society justice forum

16 June  
Opening of "The Spirit of Sculpture" Exhibition

17 June  
President of Pakistan visiting NZ

18 June  
Lions vs Otago - Dunedin

Mt Roskill Campaign Launch

Laura Ferguson 21st Annual Raceday

Order of St John's Annual Volunteers dinner

24 June  
Official opening of AUT Art & Design building

Somervell Memorial Presbyterian Church Centennial

24-26 June  
National Party Conference in Wellington

24 June 25 July  
House in Adjournment

28 June  
Richard to address Rotary Club of Downtown Auckland

Richard Worth

Visit my website for more information at: www.richardworth.co.nz

[© Scoop Media](http://www.scoop.co.nz/about/terms.html)  

Advertisement - scroll to continue reading



a.supporter:hover {background:#EC4438!important;} @media screen and (max-width: 480px) { #byline-block div.byline-block {padding-right:16px;}}

### Using Scoop for work?

Scoop is free for personal use, but you’ll need a licence for work use. This is part of our Ethical Paywall and how we fund Scoop. Join today with plans starting from less than $3 per week, plus gain access to exclusive _Pro_ features.  
  
[Join Pro Individual](https://pro.scoop.co.nz/Individual/?from=ProIn24) [Find out more](https://pro.scoop.co.nz/using-scoop-for-work/?from=ProIn24)

Find more from [New Zealand National Party](https://info.scoop.co.nz/New_Zealand_National_Party) on InfoPages.