---
slug: in-focus-28-july-2015
title: "In Focus: 28 July 2015"
date: 2015-07-28
source-url: https://www.scoop.co.nz/stories/PA1507/S00469/in-focus-28-july-2015.htm
author: new-zealand-national-party
---
In Focus: 28 July 2015
======================

**Tuesday, 28 July 2015, 9:31 am**  
**Press Release: [New Zealand National Party](https://info.scoop.co.nz/New_Zealand_National_Party)**

Hon Jo Goodhew, MP for Rangitata

Meeting with Constituents

In my last newsletter I talked about one particularly busy day spent in the electorate during Parliament’s two week recess.

The mid-winter recess also gave me the chance to spend a couple of days catching up with family and the rest catching up with constituents and organisations in the electorate.

Meetings with constituents invariably cover a huge range of issues and while I cannot discuss individual cases I can indicate the range of concerns.

Over the last two or three weeks I have spoken with constituents about health issues, immigration issues, housing accessibility and tenancy conditions, sports funding, disability support, defensive driving, foreign investment, tax issues, transport issues, rest home subsidies, overseas pension issues and more.

My staff, on my behalf, are often able to the discuss issues raised with the appropriate Government department and clarify the issues constituents have raised. Getting some clarity or better understanding of a particular issue for a constituent is a satisfying part of the work we do.

  
Health and Safety Reform Bill report

Over recent months I have had numerous conversations with constituents and other people around the country about this legislation. Whilst no-one has argued that we should do 'something' to address our workplace death and injury toll, there has been nervousness about what the 'fix' will look like.

Below are extracts from Minister Michael Woodhouse's announcement of the changes, now that the Bill has come back from the Select Committee for further debate.

Advertisement - scroll to continue reading





Changes to the Health and Safety Reform Bill reported by the transport and industrial relations select committee are an important milestone in the Government’s Working Safer reforms which are aimed at combatting New Zealand’s unacceptable workplace death and injury toll.

The amended Bill takes a risk-based approach to focus effort on what a business needs to do, what is “reasonably practicable” for it to do, and what is in its sphere of control.

It also supports more effective worker engagement and participation and will allow businesses to take a flexible approach to this in a way that suits their business size and needs.

Proposed changes to the Bill made by the Select Committee include:

Coverage of volunteers will remain the same as the provisions under the current law, ensuring volunteering is unaffected.  
Every organisation will have an obligation to have a worker participation requirement but there will be more flexibility in how to meet that requirement, particularly for small lower risk businesses.  
Farmers’ duties will be clarified to clearly indicate where and when they do or do not extend on the farm.  
Clarification that PCBUs (person conducting business or undertaking) must fulfil their overlapping duties to the extent they have the ability to influence and control the matter.  
Officer duties will apply only to individuals who have a very senior governance role in the organisation where they exercise significant influence over the management of the business.  
In addition to the Committee’s recommended changes, the Government will make some further changes by Supplementary Order Paper.

These changes include:

Specifically excluding the family farmhouse from being part of the workplace.  
Changing the sentencing guidance in the Bill to require that courts must specifically consider death or the harm (both actual and potential) caused by an offence in their sentencing.  
Clarifying that a duty holder’s obligation to manage risk is limited to doing what is within their ability to control or influence. The officer’s duties will take into account the role the officer has in the business, their position and the nature of their responsibilities.

More students achieving

Parents will be happy to know there is steady improvement in Rangitata with more kids attending ECE and more students passing NCEA Level 2 or leaving school with NCEA Level 2.

In Rangitata 81.4 per cent of students are passing NCEA Level 2, an increase of 0.8 per cent and 78.4 per cent of students leaving school have NCEA Level 2, an increase of 2 per cent.

This is fantastic news. I want to congratulate all our hard-working students, and thank their parents, teachers, and principals who supported their education and their achievements.

98.1 per cent of children in Rangitata are participating in ECE, an increase of 0.4 per cent.

We know the earlier our children get started in education, the better off they will be. The early childhood years are vital to a child’s development and to their future ability to learn so it’s great to see that the vast majority of Kiwi kids are getting the best possible start in life.

  
Applications open for 2016 Youth Funding

The 2016 Youth Fund is open for applications and I am encouraging constituents with ideas for youth-driven projects to apply for a share of the Government’s $200,000 Youth Fund.

We have many outstanding young people in our communities and this fund supports activities that develop their decision-making and leadership skills.

The Youth Fund initiative is for projects that respond to a need in the community as identified by young people. Projects must be led by individuals or groups of young people aged 12 to 24 years old, or organisations working in partnership with young people.

Funding applications will be assessed by a Youth Funding Panel. Youth Funding Panels are made up of young people trained in funding decision-making and supported by the Ministry of Youth Development.

Funding of up to $7000 is available, with applications closing on Thursday 10 September 2015.

  
More SmartGates for smoother travel

National is investing $6.6 million on 29 more SmartGate machines to help travellers get through Customs and get on their way.

The new machines are a one-stop-shop where passengers can scan their passport and step up to the biometric scanner, eliminating the kiosk and ticket. Currently passengers have to queue twice, once to get a ticket and again when they put it through.

This investment will future-proof the border, with traveller numbers expected to reach 12.7 million a year by 2019. New Zealand is already ranked sixth in the world for efficiency at the border, this upgrade means our process will continue to be world class.

We are committed to providing better public services, ensuring our border is managed efficiently and effectively is one of the ways we are doing this.

  
Stopping methamphetamine at the border

Methamphetamine, or P, creates a whole raft of problems for families and communities and the National Government is not prepared to tolerate it. Stopping methamphetamine at the border is a big part of this fight.

Customs officials have been working hard and have made 1660 drug seizures between January and June this year. This includes 252 seizures of methamphetamine or precursors to the drug. Their efforts have kept $246 million worth of methamphetamine off New Zealand streets.

Stopping drugs before they even hit the market prevents a huge amount of heartache for New Zealanders. Customs is working closely with Police as part of our whole-of-government Methamphetamine Action Plan to combat the trade of drugs.

  
Upcoming Events

July 26 – July 31 – Ministerial visit to Vietnam  
July 28 – July 30 – Parliament sitting  
August 6 – constituency work, Timaru  
August 7 – host Brett Hudson MP, Ashburton  
August 10 – constituency work, Methven  
August 11 – 13 – Parliament sitting

ENDS

[© Scoop Media](http://www.scoop.co.nz/about/terms.html)  

Advertisement - scroll to continue reading



a.supporter:hover {background:#EC4438!important;} @media screen and (max-width: 480px) { #byline-block div.byline-block {padding-right:16px;}}

### Using Scoop for work?

Scoop is free for personal use, but you’ll need a licence for work use. This is part of our Ethical Paywall and how we fund Scoop. Join today with plans starting from less than $3 per week, plus gain access to exclusive _Pro_ features.  
  
[Join Pro Individual](https://pro.scoop.co.nz/Individual/?from=ProIn24) [Find out more](https://pro.scoop.co.nz/using-scoop-for-work/?from=ProIn24)

Find more from [New Zealand National Party](https://info.scoop.co.nz/New_Zealand_National_Party) on InfoPages.