---
title: "Academic journal launched"
slug: academic-journal-launched
date: 2004-06-24
source: https://www.scoop.co.nz/stories/ED0406/S00086/academic-journal-launched.htm
source-name: Scoop
author: Association of University Staff
author-slug: association-of-university-staff
---
<div class="story-top">
           <h1>Academic journal launched</h1>

           <span class="byline"><b>Thursday, 24 June 2004,  2:07 pm</b><br>
             <b>Press Release: <a href="https://info.scoop.co.nz/Association_of_University_Staff">Association of University Staff</a></b></span>

         </div>

	 <p>
         Academic journal launched<br>The Association of University
Staff (AUS) has launched an electronic journal, The New
Zealand Journal of Tertiary Education Policy – Nga
matauranga hikohiko o Aotearoa, which is intended to provide
a forum within which issues concerning tertiary education in
Aotearoa/New Zealand can be identified, discussed and
debated.<br>The journal’s Executive Editor, Neville
Blampied, says that since “Learning for Life”, in 1989,
tertiary education in New Zealand has experienced fifteen
years of constant re-examination and review – the Green
paper, the White paper, the four reports of the Tertiary
Education Advisory Commission – as well as many other
policies and proposals. “Shifts in policies have had major
effects on students, on staff and on the character and
operations of tertiary education institutions themselves,
sometimes for the better, often for the worse,” said Mr
Blampied. “Policy development and implementation have run
well ahead of analysis, critique and evaluation.” <br>AUS
has supported the development of the new journal because it
is committed to improving and sustaining a quality higher
education sector for New Zealand, and because part of its
mission is to help formulate policy and assist union members
in their role as critic and conscience of society. <br>The
first issue of the Journal features articles by former AUS
National President, Dr Grant Duncan, The Tertiary Education
Strategy and the will to know, and an investigation of
university research by Auckland University of Technology
academic, Keith Rankin, entitled Where Gift and Market
Economics Meet. <br>The next issue will be published in the
last quarter of 2004, and is planned to have a focus on the
Performance-Based Research Fund and its future implications
and effects. <br>The journal, with full editorial details,
can now be viewed on line at:
<br>www.aus.ac.nz/publications/Ejournal/Titlepage_issue1.htm</p><p>Ends</p><p>For
further information of comment please contact:</p><p>Neville
Blampied<br>Executive Editor<br>New Zealand Journal of
Tertiary Education Policy<br>Phone 	(03) 3642 199
(work)<br>	(03) 960 7176
(home)<br>Email	neville.blampied@canterbury.ac.nz</p><p>
</p>

<p>

         <br>
</p><div id="story-footer" style="padding:20px 0;">

<div id="div-gpt-ad-1493962836337-6" style="min-width: 300px; min-height: 250px; text-align: center;"><div style="text-align:center; font-size:14px; font-style: italic; color: grey; padding: 4px;">Advertisement - scroll to continue reading</div>
  
</div>
</div>
<!--


