---
title: "NZ Association of Scientists applauds introducing living standards alongside traditional economic indicators in today’s budget."
date: 2019-05-30
slug: 2019-budget
source: https://scientists.org.nz/press-releases
source-name: The New Zealand Association of Scientists
author: The New Zealand Association of Scientists
author-slug: the-new-zealand-association-of-scientists
---

1
Thursday, 30 May 2019
NZ Association of Scientists applauds introducing living standards alongside traditional
economic indicators in today’s budget.
Today the NZ government announced its first wellbeing budget, acknowledging that
traditional economic indicators do not necessarily measure what really matters for a
society.
Similarly, “Whilst we might be looking for new funding increases in traditional and
established science funding processes, we will not find those in the 2019 budget. Instead,
the emphasis is on specific initiatives, such as resilience of our biosecurity system, focus on
freshwater for various applications, climate-resilient growth and sustainable land use, which
will result in flow-on effects into our NZ science system” says Dr Heide Friedrich, President
of NZAS.
The NZ Association of Scientists, a 78 year old independent Association that advocates for
science and scientists, applauds the government for exploring different proxies of what a
thriving society encompasses, such as considering the human, natural and social capital
alongside traditional economic indicators.
In New Zealand/Aotearoa we are proud to act as kaitiaki for our unique culture, land, flora
and fauna and increased funding to support Te Reo Māori and Māori communities is also
welcomed by the NZ Association of Scientists, as this is where many of our future scientists
need to come from.
Dr Friedrich is concerned though that “One of the most serious issues in science and
research is a lack of funding. Although I can see positive funding flow-on effects into the
science system from the 2019 budget, we will still have a problem of excessive competition
for too little funding. This creates a micro-managed environment, pushing the limits of
meaningful performance indicators, and resulting in more elevated stress levels in
scientists”.
“Conversely, a lack of appropriately sized science funding creates a work environment that
places increased pressure on mental health, which is specifically part of what the wellbeing
budget tries to address. We have to be careful when well-meaning initiatives indirectly
contribute to what they try to fix.” Dr Friedrich says.
Finally, through supporting innovation, the government aims to contribute to the target of
investing two per cent of New Zealand’s GDP into R&D by 2027. Dr Friedrich raises the
question “Can universities and CRI’s adapt their often massive operations to better incubate2
and work with start-ups to align with the government’s desire to support more radical and
disruptive innovations?”
The New Zealand Association of Scientists (https://scientists.org.nz/) is made up of a wide
cross-section of the New Zealand science community, from University departments to CRIs
to those working in independent research organisations or in science-related policy
development.
Contact: New Zealand Association of Scientists (NZAS) President Dr Heide Friedrich
email: h.friedrich@auckland.ac.nz | president@scientists.org.nz| ph: 022 6402255