---
title: "Employment agreements settled at Otago University"
slug: employment-agreements-settled-at-otago-university
date: 2004-07-07
source: https://www.scoop.co.nz/stories/ED0407/S00023/employment-agreements-settled-at-otago-university.htm
source-name: Scoop
author: Association of University Staff
author-slug: association-of-university-staff
---
<div class="story-top">
           <h1>Employment agreements settled at Otago University</h1>

           <span class="byline"><b>Wednesday,  7 July 2004,  5:49 pm</b><br>
             <b>Press Release: <a href="https://info.scoop.co.nz/Association_of_University_Staff">Association of University Staff</a></b></span>

         </div>

	 <p>
         New employment agreements settled at Otago
University<br>Union members at the University of Otago have
voted to settle new collective employment agreements, ending
several months of industrial tension which included strike
action and threatened disruption of student examination
results.<br>More than 600 staff, who are members of five
unions involved in the negotiations, voted by an average of
more than 70 percent to ratify the new agreements. General
staff will receive a 3.5% salary increase, effective from 1
June, and academic staff will receive a minimum salary
increase of 3.5% from 1 May. A restructuring of the academic
salary scales will provide further increases for academic
staff at lecturer level and at senior lecturer above the
bar.<br>Acting AUS Otago Branch President Sandy Graham said
that the negotiations had been difficult and most staff
would be relieved that they were now over. She said that
while staff believed they had a strong and justifiable claim
for increases above those which had been offered by the
University, they had taken a pragmatic decision to accept
the current proposals. “The issues which we raised to
support a significant salary increase have not been
resolved, and those arguments will be raised again in the
next bargaining round,” she said.<br>Ms Graham said the
current Vice-Chancellor had a particularly confrontation
approach to industrial relations and had threatened to
suspend any union members who withheld examination grades in
the current dispute. “Union members appreciate that the
university sector is underfunded and there are wider issues
to be resolved if we are to make progress”, she said. “We
look forward to a better relationship with the incoming
Vice-Chancellor and working with him to resolve those
long-standing salary disparities.”</p><p>Ends</p><p>For further
information please contact<br>Sandy Graham, Acting
President, AUS Otago branch<br>Phone 	(03) 479 8976
(work)<br>	(03) 476 3662
(home)<br>Email	sandy.graham@stonebow.otago.ac.nz</p><p>Marty
Braithwaite<br>Phone	(04) 915 2680 (work)<br>	(04) 977 8529
(home)<br>	027 2747 795
(mobile<br>Email	marty.braithwaite@aus.ac.nz<br>
</p>

<p>

         <br>
</p><div id="story-footer" style="padding:20px 0;">

<div id="div-gpt-ad-1493962836337-6" style="min-width: 300px; min-height: 250px; text-align: center;"><div style="text-align:center; font-size:14px; font-style: italic; color: grey; padding: 4px;">Advertisement - scroll to continue reading</div>
  
</div>
</div>
<!--


