---
title: "Staff union brings legal action against University"
slug: staff-union-brings-legal-action-against-university
date: 2005-03-17
source: https://www.scoop.co.nz/stories/ED0503/S00057/staff-union-brings-legal-action-against-university.htm
source-name: Scoop
author: Association of University Staff
author-slug: association-of-university-staff
---

<p>The Association of University Staff (AUS) is taking legal
action against the University of Auckland’s Vice-Chancellor,
Stuart McCutcheon, after he failed to show up at a
preliminary national employment agreement negotiation
meeting in Wellington on Tuesday this week. Stuart
McCutcheon told the AUS he will only negotiate
single-employer collective agreements at his University, and
has offered non-union staff a 4.5 percent salary
increase.<br>The AUS and other unions initiated bargaining
earlier in the year for new national collective employment
agreements as part of a campaign to address inadequate
funding and salaries in the university sector. The unions
have endorsed a 30 percent salary increase for academic
staff and 16 percent plus a national job evaluation scheme
for general (non-academic) staff to be implemented over a
three year period.<br>In legal proceedings filed with the
Employment Relations Authority yesterday, the AUS has
alleged that the Vice-Chancellor has acted unlawfully and is
actively undermining bargaining, not just by his refusal to
participate in multi-employer negotiations, but also in
offering the salary increase to non-union staff on the eve
of the union negotiations.<br>AUS National President
Professor Nigel Haworth said that the University had a legal
obligation to meet with the unions once multi-employer
bargaining had been initiated, and to consider and respond
to any proposals submitted by the parties for negotiation.
“The University also has a statutory duty to deal with the
unions in good faith, and not to do anything with the
intention of inducing union members not to be involved in
bargaining or not to be covered by a collective agreement,”
he said. “In our view, the Vice-Chancellor’s actions were a
deliberate attempt to undermine and weaken the national
bargaining process.”<br>The AUS has sought an order
requiring the University to participate in the national
bargaining process and declaring that the Vice-Chancellor
has acted unlawfully. It has also asked for a ruling that,
by offering non-union staff the 4.5 percent salary increase
just as national bargaining was about to begin, the
Vice-Chancellor was unlawfully undermining the
bargaining.<br>The Employment Relations Authority is likely
to take some steps to progress the matter later this
week.<br>Meanwhile, representatives of the other six
universities met with union representatives on Tuesday and
have drafted a protocol around which to proceed with
national bargaining. Formal negotiations are due to get
under way in April.<p>
<p>Ends</p>

<p>For further information please
contact<br>Professor Nigel Haworth					<br>AUS National
President					<br>Phone	(09) 373 7599, extension 85235
(work) <br>(09) 376 6359	(home)					<br>Mobile	021 637
599			<br>Email
	president@aus.ac.nz	<br>	n.haworth@auckland.ac.nz			<br>or</p>

<p>Marty
Braithwaite<br>AUS Communications Officer<br>Phone 027 2747
795 (mobile)<br>Email
marty.braithwaite@aus.ac.nz<br><p>