---
title: "Auckland Uni library closures slammed as 'a betrayal'"
date: 2018-04-30
slug: auckland-uni-library-closures-slammed-as-a-betrayal
source: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CX0aj1jM5bA
source-name: RNZ
author: Sarah Robson
author-slug: sarah-robson
---

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/CX0aj1jM5bA?si=Nk_YK44uBA2okkkk" title="YouTube video player" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture; web-share" referrerpolicy="strict-origin-when-cross-origin" allowfullscreen></iframe>

Hundreds of University of Auckland students and supporters protested today against the planned closure of several libraries over fears about what it will mean for their learning and research.---

many hundreds of University of Auckland
students and supporters have rallied
today to protest against the closure of
several specialist libraries the
universities architecture and planning
music and dance and Fine Arts libraries
are all earmarked for closure but
students say there haven't been
consulted about of what it means and
they fear what the closures will mean
for their learning and research and with
the sense that the university is losing
something as an institution our reporter
Sarah Robson was the lead by a band from
the music school hundreds of students
carrying banners and placards much from
the university's general library to the
office of the Vice Chancellor one of
them was thirdly a finance student Rose
Burge she says it feels like the
university is taking resources away from
students with its library closure
proposal gabriela jimenez rojas studies
planning and urban design the
architecture and planning library is set
to be demolished and she's worried about
how they'll access the books they need
but visual people and we need those
around us we need the ability to look at
something and be inspired by it because
it's in front of us and not have to
always like think of oh this might be
something I need in terms of my research
and then I have to go looking for it
that's it's not the way architecture
works it's not the way planning we're
x-ray driven by what's around us under
the proposal the specialist libraries
will be merged with the general library
but because there's not enough space
there some of the books we put into
storage that means students will have to
request books and it'll take 24 hours
for them to be delivered gabriella
Jimenez Rojas says some people are
rethinking their future study plans I
know I'm rethinking definitely dreaming
my
design masters and my penny masters here
because I don't know whether the
resources are gonna help me and whether
they're gonna give me the the scope that
I need or maybe I need to go somewhere
else to be able to get all of that so if
the university is trying to drive
students away it's doing a very good job
the Oakland University Students
Association president and a Kozak says
students haven't been consulted on the
library closure proposal we want the
process to be halted before it goes to a
panel so it's going to go to a panel
there's no students on that panel we've
been asking and we're not allowed to
have any students on that panel and
we're not allowed to have any Evan use
of official consultation so we want it
now to be halted and for students to
actually get a say on these faces and a
kuszak says they understand they can't
be involved in any decision-making
around employment issues but they should
be able to have a say about the spaces
students use Rachel Ashby who finished
her honours degree in finance last year
sister university has ignored the views
of its biggest stakeholders that's
really absolutely unacceptable for a
university to neglect as large a
stakeholder to neglect the people that
it predominantly exists for as its
researchers and its students and to
refuse them access into a process that
is fundamentally challenging their major
resources and Rachel Ashby sees they're
not giving up we're not going to be
quiet about this you know we care about
our specialist librarians there's 45
jobs on the line here we care about
these spaces there are community
gathering points and that's something
that the university fundamentally hasn't
understood because they haven't talked
with us the students wanted to present a
petition to the universities Vice
Chancellor Stewart McCutcheon but they
were locked out of the Clocktower
building and had to hand it over to the
head of security instead a university
spokeswoman said the university had no
response to the students calls for the
consultation process to be halted
so the abuse could be included morty
Horta courtier here he coursera Robson
aho