---
slug: university-a-major-player-in-the-region
title: "University a Major Player in the Region"
date: 2013-04-18
source-url: https://www.scoop.co.nz/stories/ED1304/S00120/university-a-major-player-in-the-region.htm
author: waikato-university
---
University a Major Player in the Region
=======================================

**Thursday, 18 April 2013, 2:36 pm**  
**Press Release: [Waikato University](https://info.scoop.co.nz/Waikato_University)**

**University a Major Player in the Region**

The University of Waikato and its students generated $791 million in the Waikato economy last year – slightly up on the previous year - and contributed 4.5% of the region’s annual revenue.

Independent economist Dr Warren Hughes has analysed Waikato University’s contribution to the region and country for the last few years and the 2012 figures show spending by the university generated $860 million in the New Zealand economy overall.

That figure includes direct spending, student spending, and the flow-on effect into other sectors, including retail, transport, energy, sport and recreation and personal and community services.

The university has about 12,500 students and 1500 staff and for every dollar generated by its operations, there was another $1.22 flow-on revenue across the regional economy. Every job at the university generates another 0.65 of a job in the rest of the country – 87 percent in the core region, which takes in Hamilton, Raglan, Cambridge, Te Awamutu, Huntly and Ngaruawahia.

Hamilton students spent an estimated $138 million in addition to their university fees and accommodation. In Tauranga, students spent $5.4 million on personal expenditure and that makes the university responsible for creating 63 additional jobs in that city on top of its teaching and resulting flow-on employment.

Vice-Chancellor Professor Roy Crawford says the results are pleasing in what are difficult economic times. “We are committed to developing new opportunities for our students in both regions, and are working with iwi and stakeholders in the Waikato and through the Bay of Plenty Tertiary Education Partnership to expand our teaching and research in areas where it’s needed. The partnership activity between universities and their home cities is mutually beneficial.”

The University also has a focus to enhance its national and international reputation - it already sits in the top 2% of universities in the world. “And we have a strong focus on academic leadership and developing a culture of high performance. That starts at home so our relationship with the region is crucial to our success,” says Professor Crawford.

ENDS

Advertisement - scroll to continue reading





[© Scoop Media](http://www.scoop.co.nz/about/terms.html)  

Advertisement - scroll to continue reading



a.supporter:hover {background:#EC4438!important;} @media screen and (max-width: 480px) { #byline-block div.byline-block {padding-right:16px;}}

### Using Scoop for work?

Scoop is free for personal use, but you’ll need a licence for work use. This is part of our Ethical Paywall and how we fund Scoop. Join today with plans starting from less than $3 per week, plus gain access to exclusive _Pro_ features.  
  
[Join Pro Individual](https://pro.scoop.co.nz/Individual/?from=ProIn24) [Find out more](https://pro.scoop.co.nz/using-scoop-for-work/?from=ProIn24)

Find more from [Waikato University](https://info.scoop.co.nz/Waikato_University) on InfoPages.