---
title: "VUW educators protest against Israeli ‘propaganda’ in Student Union Building"
slug: vuw-educators-protest-against-israeli-propaganda-in-student-union-building
date: 2015-09-28
source: https://wellington.scoop.co.nz/?p=82098
source-name: Scoop
author: Dougal McNeill
author-slug: dougal-mcneill
---
<p>Media release from Dougal McNeill<br>
As academics, researchers and educators associated with Victoria University, we are dismayed to learn that the Student Union Building will play host this week to soldiers from the Israeli Defense Force, touring Aotearoa/New Zealand as part of a nation-wide campaign to justify Israeli crimes in last year’s war in Gaza. <span id="more-82098"></span></p>

<p>Operation Protective Edge, Israel’s assault on the Gaza strip in July last year, killed some 2,194 people over 51 days. 1,523 of these casualties were civilians. The United Nations stated that Israel’s use of heavy artillery against Gaza “may amount to a war crime.”</p>

<p>This attack had a devastating effect on educational and academic life in Gaza. Three universities, seven United Nations schools and at least 140 local schools suffered severe damage from Israeli attacks. Over 20 students were killed in an attack on Al Quds Open University. 60 academic staff and their families were displaced, as were over 2000 students and their families. Summer courses in 2014 were largely cancelled.</p>

<p>Our academic colleagues in Palestine are unable to play their part in normal scholarly life due to Israeli blockades, disruptions, and harassment of Palestinian life in Gaza and other occupied territories. Palestinian students have their movements restricted, and are thus unable often to take up opportunities for studies abroad or for other normal exchanges.</p>

<p>It is astonishing, therefore, that an exercise in propaganda and apologetics for military violence should be hosted at a university setting under the guise of education and learning opportunities. This meeting gives a platform to IDF soldiers for them to celebrate the very conflict that led to such massive Palestinian loss of life.</p>

<p>Hosting IDF apologists at Victoria will have a chilling effect for Palestinian and Arab students studying in our community, many of whom have experienced either direct loss as a result of the conflict or the more generalized threats of anti-Arab racism generated by the Israeli rhetoric of Palestinians as ‘terrorists’.</p>

<p>As scholars in Aotearoa, with its own colonial history, we have a particular duty to speak out on this question. Students planning to protest this event uphold essential traditions of free speech and dissent.</p>

<p>Signed:</p>

<p>Dr Anita Brady<br>
Dr April Henderson<br>
Dr Cybèle Locke<br>
Dr Dougal McNeill<br>
Dr Teresia Teaiwa<br>
Dr Paul Wolffram</p>

<p>Media release from Australasian Union of Jewish Students<br>
“It is shameful that students on a New Zealand university campus have tried to prevent an open exchange of views on a complex, longstanding Middle East conflict,” said Caelan MacBeth, a spokesperson for AUJS (Australasian Union of Jewish Students). “The basis upon which a university is built is that of debate, open discussion, equality of representation, and the right to free speech.”</p>

<p>He was responding to the call from a Palestinian student group for Victoria University of Wellington Students Association (VUWSA) to cancel the booking for a meeting in the Cotton Building on 29 September.</p>

<p>Two Israeli medical/business school students on holiday in New Zealand, who served in the Israeli Army, are offering to share their experiences as reserve soldiers in last year’s conflict between Israel and Hamas.</p>

<p>The Palestinian student support group wanted to flout the NZ Bill of Rights Act, which affirms the right to freedom of expression (section 14), by preventing the Israelis from speaking at Victoria University of Wellington.</p>

<p>“The authoritarian methods of Hamas’s rule over Gaza have no place in New Zealand, and we applaud the decision of VUWSA and the university to reject the Palestinian students’ demand,” MacBeth said, “We hope you will come to hear those whom some would have silenced.”</p>