---
slug: foreign-minister-lines-up-with-us-empire
title: "Foreign Minister Lines Up With US Empire"
date: 2023-12-12
source-url: https://www.scoop.co.nz/stories/PO2312/S00086/foreign-minister-lines-up-with-us-empire.htm
author: peace-action-wellington
---
Foreign Minister Lines Up With US Empire
========================================

**Tuesday, 12 December 2023, 10:52 am**  
**Press Release: [Peace Action Wellington](https://info.scoop.co.nz/Peace_Action_Wellington)**

“The Minister of Foreign Affairs’ speech outlining a new approach for  
New Zealand should be ringing alarm bells for anyone concerned about  
preventing a war in our region,” said Peace Action Wellington member  
Valerie Morse.

“Winston Peters claims to be interested in multilateralism, but what he  
advocates for is closer relationships to the US empire and its  
aggressive posturing in the South Pacific. He intends ‘reinvigorating  
defence engagement’ with the United States and other Five Eyes partners  
which translates to signing up to AUKUS, the multibillion dollar weapons  
deal between the US, Australia and the UK with disastrous results for  
peace in our region.”

“New Zealand troops already participate in two enormous war planning  
exercises led by the US: RIMPAC (‘the Rim of the Pacific’) naval  
training held in Hawai’i with 25,000 troops, and Talisman Sabre,  
land-based combat training held in Australia involving 30,000 troops.  
The NZDF is already highly integrated with US forces.”

“There are the existing Washington and Wellington Declarations, defence  
cooperation agreements between the US and New Zealand. There is the Five  
Eyes partnership that includes technical and staff sharing between  
intelligence agencies.”

“It is also extraordinary that Peters’ claims to be interested in  
multilateralism while he engages in obstructing international  
institutions like the World Health Organisation. This is straight out of  
the US far right playbook. He is interested in tearing down genuine  
multilateralism in favour of the US-led order.”

Advertisement - scroll to continue reading





“His speech makes oblique references to ‘illegal invasions’ while he  
refuses to call for an immediate ceasefire in the mass atrocity that is  
Israel’s war on Gaza, and the decades-long illegal occupation of  
Palestinian lands. Instead he makes milquetoast statements calling for  
‘measures’ towards a ceasefire while thousands more people are murdered  
by a relentless bombing campaign.”

“The United States is the greatest threat to global peace and security  
bar none. Its sole interest is in maintaining US economic domination. It  
is not interested in democracy or peace when those conflict with its own  
economic interests.”

“The US engagement in the Pacific is driven by its fear of China. It is  
fueling an arms race in the South Pacific, and billions of dollars are  
spent buying weapons that should be used to address real problems  
including climate change and healthcare.”

“Closer alignment to the US will see billions funneled to US weapons  
dealers and a more dangerous region. New Zealand should instead be a  
regional leader for a South Pacific weapons-free zone with an aggressive  
disarmament strategy to rid the entire area of the seeds of conflict.”

[© Scoop Media](http://www.scoop.co.nz/about/terms.html)  

Advertisement - scroll to continue reading



a.supporter:hover {background:#EC4438!important;} @media screen and (max-width: 480px) { #byline-block div.byline-block {padding-right:16px;}}

### Using Scoop for work?

Scoop is free for personal use, but you’ll need a licence for work use. This is part of our Ethical Paywall and how we fund Scoop. Join today with plans starting from less than $3 per week, plus gain access to exclusive _Pro_ features.  
  
[Join Pro Individual](https://pro.scoop.co.nz/Individual/?from=ProIn24) [Find out more](https://pro.scoop.co.nz/using-scoop-for-work/?from=ProIn24)

Find more from [Peace Action Wellington](https://info.scoop.co.nz/Peace_Action_Wellington) on InfoPages.